November 12, 2002 -1- Final Decision and Order 02-250

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Hartford Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Assistant Corporation Counsel
550 Main Street
Hartford, CT 06103

Appealing before: Attorney Mary H.B1 Gelfmam Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ‘ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Are the special education program and placement offered to Student by the Board
appropriate to his needs in the least restrictive environment?

2. If not, What is an appropriate special education program and placement for Student?

3. What is the appropriate special education identiﬁcation for Student?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The request for hearing dated June 21, 2002, was received at the State Department of
Education on September 4, 2002, and the Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on the same
day. No explanation for the delay was offered by either party on the record of the
hearing,

A pre~heaxing conference was held on September 16, 2002: Parent did not respond to
telephone contact. Because a request for mediation was included with the request for
hearing, the Board agreed to attempt mediation and therefore the Hearing Ofﬁcer
extended the deadline for the mailing of the ﬁnal decision and order from October 21,
2002, to November 20, 2002‘ Notice of the hearing scheduled for October 17 was sent
out on September 17 with a memo summarizing the pre—hearing conference. No
mediation was he1d.

 

November 12, 2002 —2- Final Decision and Order 02-250

The hearing convened on October 17, 2002, with Parent and Student present. After a
brief conference, Parent agreed to have Student try a proposed placement. An additional
hearing session was scheduled for October 3] in case any issues remained in dispute.
The hearing re-convened on October 31, 2002, and Parent reported on Student’s status
and her concerns.

SUMMARY:

Student had been moved ﬁ'om HTLA to a less restrictive placement at South Middle
School in March, 2002, in response to Palem’s concems. After several disciplinary
incidents resulting in suspensions, Parent requested a change ofp1acement. Aﬁer the
initiation of a due process hearing in September, 2002, the Board offered a placement at
Quirk Middle School.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

 

1, Student was bum on October 22, 1990, is now 12 years old and is currently in (he 7‘h
grade. (Exhibit 13-] 1)

2. In March, 2002, Student transferred from a specialized program at HTLA to a less
restrictive program at South Middle School. The Bomd provided after school
tutoring three days a week with transportation and a han-huur of social work services
per week. The record of the March 14, 2002, Planning and Placement Team (PPT)
meeting showed Student as “SED” [seriously emotionally disturbed]. (Exhibit B-2)

3. Evaluations conducted in February and March, 2002, showed Student‘s performance
in reading, mathematics and writing skills as low average and language skills as
average The evaluator noted that in morning testing sessions, Student was easily re—
focused when he was distracted. However, in aﬁemoon sessions, he had more
difﬁculty remaining focused. (Exhibit 3-1)

4. A.“ Occupational Therapy evaluation dated March 28, 2002, summarized Student’s
status:

[Student] scored in the average range in all Visual perception and visual motor
testing [Student] demonstrates fair letter formation, word spacing and orientation

to the line when writing. No Occupational Therapy services are recommended at
this 1ime. (Exhibit B-3)

5. A psychological evaluation dated March 27 and April 3, 2002, reports a 1999
diagnosis of Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Oppositional

Deﬁant Disorder (ODD). Student’s behavior in his current placement was described
as:

a wide range of behavior difﬁculties including oppositional and deﬁant
tendencies. He has mgued with his teachers, refused to do work, and used

November 12, 2002 -3- Final Decision and Order 02—250

inappropriate language, His aﬁer school tutor has reported that [Student] has
demonstrated very inconsistent levels of cooperation and effort, He, at times,
chooses not to do his work. He has required a tremendous amount of structure
and behavior management, with little success noted at this time.

This evaluator described Student’s behavior in the testing setting:
[Student], a moderately overweight, nice looking boy, appearing his stated age,
presented for evaluation in a somewhat disgruntled, yet cooperative manner.
Mood vaeillated from somewhat hostile and opposing to joyful and personable.
As test items were introduced, he often initially gave the impression that he may
or may not comply depending upon how he felt. With gentle eneomagement,
[Student] was able to comply with all test demands He made direct eye contact,
offered appropriate spontaneous conversation, and exhibited adequate social
interaction skills. Although [Student] appeared to be putting forth good effort, he
exhibited a notably low tolerance for frustration. As items became more
challenging, he oﬂen responded in a haughty and defensive manner. At times
stating emphatically, “I can‘t do that one!“ He oﬁen looked for reassurance and
assistance and complained as tasks became more difﬁcult. He frequently wanted
“hints” or a “head start" on the timed tasks. [Student] required a great deal of
reassurance and prompting. Dun‘ng projective testing and student interview,
[Student] presented as somewhat mislrustﬁa] and defensive. However, as rapport
was established, [Student] was more open with his thoughts and feelings. On a
self—repon inventory, [Student] often challenged the statements on the paper and
attempted to re-word them himself. Some of the changes were only minute but he
insisted that they be changed Overall, good care was taken, yet the following
results may be a slight underestimate of [Student’s] true potential due to an
opposing manner and a very low frustration tolerance. (Exhibit B-4)

6. The Maxch and April, 2002, psychological evaluator reported Student’s Verbal
Intelligence Quota as 100. or average, and Performance Intelligence Quota as 75, or
borderline Further comments from this evaluator:

Personality assessment reveals Student to be a verbally bright boy who appears to
be experiencing signiﬁcant feelings of anger, frustration, and hostility that may be
masking some underlying feelings of sadness, inadequacy, and powerlessness,
Student demonstrates a need to control his environment and can be very powerful,
ﬁxed, and manipulative when attemptmg to get his needs met, He denies any
wrongdoing, feels persecuted, and consistently blames others for his difﬁculties,
Denial and rationalization are used as primary ego defense mechanisms against
the anxiety caused by his misbehaviorst Student exhibits Very little remorse for
his past problems as well as little insight. On a teachtar- completed behavior
rating scale (TRF), clinically signiﬁcant scores were obtained under
characteristics associated with delinquent behavior and aggressive behavior,
Teacher reported that Student, “demonstrates little guilt, uses vulgar language,
argues, acts deﬁantly, brags, ﬁghts with other students, talks out, disrupts the
class, shows off, and acts in a demanding manner". Positive attributes assigned to
Student include his engaging manner and his bright verbal ability. (Exhibit B-4-
3)

November 12, 2002 -4— Final Decision and Order 02-250

10.

Behavior rating scales for Student completed by two of his teachers in April, 2002,
were included in the record submitted by the Board for this hearing. While
reasonable people might differ as to whether these behavior scales indicate a
diagnosis of emotional disturbance or one ofADHD, or both, the disruptive behaviors
identiﬁed cause disruption of Student's education, as well as that of his classmates.
One teacher identiﬁed 17 disruptive behaviors occurring frequently (once per hour) or
very frequently (once per halfhour). The second teacher identiﬁed 33 disruptive
behaviors occurring frequently or very frequently. (Exhibits B-S, 13-6)

During his placement at South Middle School, Student had many referrals for
administrative intervention. His disruptive behavior and harassment ofpeers was
addressed by counseling, telephone calls to Parent, and time-out, He also sewed
seven days of out—of-school suspension. (Exhibits B-9, 13-10)

The Parent believes that tutoring and social work services ceased aﬁer a few weeks.
The Board‘s coordinator testiﬁed that Student became less cooperative over time An
April 12, 2002, PPT meeting decided to continue tutoring, but noted that the tutor
would “determine when tutoring will cease“. (Testimony, Parent, Coordinator;
Exhibit B-8)

The April 12, 2002, PPT also offered consultation for Parent to help with Student’s
difﬁcult behavior at home In addition, the PPT recomended that Parent seek
“outside counseling”. (Exhibit 13-8)

, The Parent did not respond to telephone contact for the pre-hearing conference on

September 16, 2002. The Hearing Ofﬁcer sent the scheduling notice for the October
17, 2002. hearing to Parent and to the Board’s attorney. With the notice was a
memorandum summarizing the discussion at the pre-hearing conference, The notice

included the date of the heating and that the hearing was scheduled for 10 am. to 5
pm.

. When the hearing convened on October 17, 2002, the Board offered Student a

placement in the TOPS program at Quirk Middle Schooll Parent agreed to bring
Student to Quirk the next week, and stated that she had a medical appointment and
could not stay for the heating. Before Parent left the hearing on October 17, 2002,
another hearing session was scheduled for October 3 1, 2002, in case any issues
remained in dispute, The notice for this hearing stated that the hearing was scheduled
for 10 am. to 5 pm., but the heating was adjourned upon the Parent’s departure.
(Transcript)

. The TOPS placement is a self-contained program, with two teachers and two

paraprofessionals. Specials (i.e., physical education, art, etc) are provided with
mainstream students. The program provides academic subjects in a self-contained
class, with immediate response to misbehavior. Students who misbehave may be sent
to a time—out area or in-school suspension. With parental cooperation, students who

November 12, 2002 ~S- Final Decision and Order 02250

are having “a bad day’ may go home. Only serious infractions are punished with out-
of-school suspension. (Transcript, Testimony of Teacher, Coordinator)

14. Student enrolled in the Quirk program on October 24, 2002. On October 25, he
returned [mm a special class and was sent to get his math book. When he attempted
to take his back pack, Teacher told him to take the math book only. A dispute arose
about the back pack, with Teacher and Student both grabbing i1. and pushing each
other. Student’s and Teacher’s descriptions of this incident were consistent.
(Transcript)

15. Aﬁer a conference involving Student, Parent, Teacher and an Assistant Principal,
Student was suspended for two daysl Student remained out of school and came to the
hearing With Parent on October 31, 20021 Parent complained of questions by Teacher
that she considered intrusive: Teacher explained that the TOPS program required
close communication between home and school. (Transcript, Testimony of Patent,
Teacher)

16‘ This Hearing Ofﬁcer had two opportunities to observe Student. at the October 17 and
31, 2002 sessions of the hearing. Student was extremely well-behaved, and cheerful
at the beginning of each day. Student testiﬁed candidly about his difﬁculties in
school, although he did not acknowledge his misbehavior.

17, On October 31, 2002, Parent became upset during the hearing and challenged several
statements made by a school staff member. Parent a1so challenged Student’s
classiﬁcation as seriously emotionally disturbed. At approximately 12 noon, Parent
announced that she had an appointment and refused to remain at the hearing for
testimony to be provided by Teacher from Student’s TOPS progi'am. The Hearing
Ofﬁcer concluded the hearing aﬂer hearing Teacher’s testimony. (Transcript)

18. Student‘s current Individualized Education Program (IEP) goals, as determined at the
April 12, 2002, PPT meeting, are:
- Student will demonstrate measurable improvement in reading skills.
Student will demonstrate measurable improvement in writing skills
Student will demonstrate measurable progress in mathematics skills.
Student will demonsuate measurable progress in compliant behavior.

Student will demonstrate measurable improvement in appropriate school
behavior.

To increase responsible behavior. (Exhibit B—8)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

 

1. Student has been identiﬁed by the Board as Seriously Emotionally Disturbed. The
deﬁnition for this disability is given at 34 CPR. §300.7(c)(4):

 

November 12, 2002 -6- Final Decision and Order 02-250

Emotional disturbance is deﬁned as follows:
(i) The tem means a condition exhibiting one or more of the following
characteristics over a long period oftime and to a marked degree that
adversely affects a child’s educational performance:
(A) An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual,
sensory, or health factorsi
(B) An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal
relationships with peers and teachers.
(C) Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal
circumstances.
(D) A general pervasive mood ofunhappiness or depression.
(E) A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated
with personal or school problems.

2. Students with ADHD may be roughly divided into three gmups, pursuant to the
September, 1991, memorandum fmm the U. S. Department ofEducation. Some
students with ADI-ED, with or without medication, do not demonstrate any difﬁculty
in school. A second gmup, who demonstrate some difﬁculties in school, can be
provided with support services under §504 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act, such as
classroom modiﬁcations to help with focusing and monitoring of assignments, and
administration of medication during the school day, when prescribed by a physician.
A third group, those with serious problems in school, may be eiigible for special
education. In the latter case, the PPT cunsiders the results of a Comprehensive
evaluation and develops an Individualized Education Program (E?) that addresses
the students' strengths and weaknesses. The federal special education regulations
address eligibility for those with ADHD at 34 C.F.R. §300.7(c)(9):

Other health impairment means having limited strength. vitality 0r alertness,

including a heightened alertness to environmental stimuli, that results in limited

alenness with respect to the educational envimnment, that -

(1) Is due to chronic or acute health problems such as asthma, attention deﬁcit
disorder or attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder, diabetes, epilepsy, a
heart condttinn, hemophilia, lead poisoning, leukemia, nephritis,
rheumatic fever, and sickle cell anemia: and

(ii) Adversely affects a child’s educational performance.

3, Student may be Viewed as emotionally disturbed and/or having ADHD, None of his
test scores suggest mental retardation Since Parent is very cuncemed about his
special education classiﬁcation, additional evaluations are needed. The PPT should
consider a psychiatric evaluation to address the issues raised.

4. Student’s start in the program at Quirk was marred by a disagreement with a teacher
that resulted in a suspension. Student’s Parent objected to questions from this teacher
that she considered personal, The teacher explained that the behavioral component of
this program relies on close communication with parents. Since Student has also
displayed disruptive behavior at home, a coordinated approach to behavior problems

 

1f the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not takc
action on the ﬁndings or prescription ofthe hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁeen days ma
receipt thereuf, dz: sum Board of Education sh.“ take appropriate action m enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription uf the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals fram the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by eithcr party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4~183. Connecticut
Gencral Statutes, and Title 20, United Stats Code 1415(e).

Ebb A3§51532ﬂ
HcariugO cctSigna

HR’rLY LL11 @Mw

Hearingofﬁczr . NameinPrint

signpagevdoc (ha disk)
7mm

