March 18, 2003 -1- Final Decision and Order 02-355  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION    Student v. Manchester/Trumbull Boards of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:    Student's Father, pro se.  Appearing on behalf of the Manchester Board:  Attorney Craig S. Meuser,  Shipman & Goodwin LLP  One American Row  Hartford, CT  06103-2819     Appearing on behalf of the Trumbull Board:  Attorney Michelle Laubin  Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C.  75 Broad Street Milford, CT 06460  Appearing before:      Attorney Patricia M. Strong Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY:  This hearing was requested on December 16, 2002.  This hearing officer was assigned to the case on that date.  Prehearing conferences were held with the Parent and each Board of Education on January 6.  The Parent requested that the hearing be delayed until after a mediation was held with the Trumbull Board on January 15.  The Manchester Board of Education filed a motion to dismiss on grounds no relief was requested against it.  A hearing was scheduled on January 24 regarding Manchester's motion to dismiss.  A hearing was scheduled on January 30 on the complaint against the Trumbull Board.  Relevant background facts are that the student had attended Trumbull schools during grades 4-7 and was eligible for special education as learning disabled.  In May 2000 the student moved to Manchester to live with her mother.  In February 2001 the Manchester Board exited the student from special education.  In the summer of 2001 the student returned to Trumbull to live with her father.  Trumbull did not classify her as eligible for special education.  In June 2002 the student was expelled from Trumbull schools because of an incident at the high school.  The father attached to his due process request a three-page letter to the Trumbull Superintendent of Schools dated September 25, 2002 detailing numerous grievances against Manchester and Trumbull Boards of Education as well as a hospital and a physician who treated the student.  At the prehearing conference, the father   