March 19, 2003 -1- Final Decision and Order 03-009  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION    Student v. East Lyme Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:   Student's Mother, pro se.  Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney  Frederick L. Dorsey Siegel, O&#8482;Connor, Zangari,    O&#8482;Donnell & Beck P.C. 150 Trumbull Street  Hartford, CT   06103  Appearing before:     Attorney Patricia M. Strong  Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY:   This hearing was requested on January 10, 2003.  This hearing officer was assigned to the case on that date.  A prehearing conference was held on January 17.  The Parent requested that the Board attorney's law firm be disqualified because another attorney from the firm represented the Board at an expulsion hearing of the student and allegedly threatened the Parent.  She asserted she is planning to file a grievance against that attorney.  She was advised to put the motion in writing.  The Parent claimed that the student should have been classified as eligible for special education at a Planning and Placement Team (PPT) meeting held on December 13, 2002.  The Parent was advised that there was no issue in this hearing regarding the expulsion or the failure to hold a manifestation determination meeting.  The sole issue would be whether the student should have been found eligible for special education.  Hearing dates were agreed on for February 6 and March 14.  On January 21 the Parent sent a written request to disqualify the Board's law firm.  This was to be ruled on at the February 6 hearing, however, on February 5, the parties requested a postponement of the hearing because it appeared likely that the case would be settled.  On February 4 a PPT meeting was held at which the student was found eligible for special education as a student with other health impairment (OHI).  The parties requested that the hearing be postponed until March 14.  The request was granted.  The decision deadline was extended to March 24.    On March 13, the hearing officer received correspondence from the Board attorney stating that the matter had been resolved and that the March 14 hearing was cancelled.     