October 17, 2003 -1- Final Decision and Order 03-285  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student  v. Newington Board of Education   Appearing on behalf of the Student:  Parent, Pro Se 
                 
   Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney Nicole Bernabo 
     Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Connon, LLC 
     646 Prospect Avenue 
     Hartford, CT  06105-4286 
 Appearing before:    Attorney Christine B. Spak 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   A prehearing conference was conducted on September 15, 2003 and both parties 
participated.  The parties agreed that at the time of filing of this request for due process 
and continuing through the date of this prehearing conference the parties were involved in another due process matter involving the same
 student.  Additional future hearing dates were scheduled in that matter.   
 During the extensive prehearing conference the parties disagreed on a number of points.  
One of the points of disagreement involved the threshold question of whether the issues 
in the instant case were already under consideration in the ongoing matter, or should be 
by consolidation.  The parent maintained that the other issues were specifically excluded 
from consideration by the Hearing Officer in the other due process matter and the Board 
maintained that they were specifically included by the Hearing Officer in the other due 

process matter.  Both believed that the record in the other matter supported their position.   
 A hearing date in the instant matter was set for October 9, 2003 and the parties were 

given until October 2, 2003 to present whatever documentation they had that would 
support their position.  Nothing was received after this point from the parent.  The Board 
submitted a 
Motion to Consolidate and two documents from the other due process 
proceeding, both of which supported the Board's request that all issues be consolidated 

into that one already ongoing hearing.  The first was a Notice and Interim Rulings dated September 9, 2003 from the other Hearing Officer in which the Board's request to 
consolidate the issues "submitted by the Parent in the correspondence to Marty Hartranft 
requesting, inter alia, a second hearing with this hearing is hereby GRANTED, subject 