January 14, 2004 -1- Final Decision and Order 03-361 STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION    Farmington Board of Education  v.  Student 
 Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney Craig S. Meuser 
     Shipman & Goodwin LLP 
One American Row 
Hartford, CT   06103-2819  Appearing on behalf of the Parent:   The Parent proceeded 
pro se   Appearing before:     Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim 
Hearing Officer  ISSUE:  Whether the Board is entitled to a comprehensive evaluation of the Student in the 
absence of parental consent.  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   The matter was assigned on November 4, 2003, and a prehearing conference was 

held on November 7.  The Parent did not participate in the prehearing conference as she 
was not available at the scheduled time. 
 The hearing convened on November 18, but was continued at the request of the 
Board, so that information could be obtained regarding the residency of the Student. 
 1  The hearing continued on December 9, at which time the Board&#8482;s attorney 
indicated that the residency of the Student continued to be an issue.  At the December 9 

hearing, the Board director testified that the Parent had indicated that she intended to register the Student at Bristol public schools, and that the Student would live with 
another person in Bristol.  At that time, Bristol was challenging residency, and a 
residency hearing was pending.   The Student&#8482;s brother was attending the Board schools at this time, and therefore, the Board was concerned that the Bristol schools would 
prevail in their residency hearing.  The Board was informed that a decision would be 
made on the residency matter by the end of the month.  [Testimony Jane Currie] 
 The hearing was continued to January 6 at which time the Board indicated that the 
residency issue was still unresolved, and the matter was continued. 
                                                  1 The hearing was also continued due to the hearing officer&#8482;s urgent medical appointment. 
