January 20, 2004 -1- Final Decision and Order 03-396  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student  v.  South Windsor Board of Education   
 Appearing on behalf of the Student:  
Pro Se  Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Linda L. Yoder, Esq. 
      Shipman & Goodwin LLP 
      One American Row 
      Hartford, CT  06103-2819 
 Appearing before:    Scott P. Myers, Esq. 
      Hearing Officer 
  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  ISSUES:  Was the wallet-stealing incident in which th
e Student was involved a manifestation of a 
disability which would entitle the Student to special education and related services support under the IDEA and/or Connecticut law and, if so, what is the disability?   SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY   This proceeding was commenced on December 12, 2003 by the Parent who is 
challenging a determination that an incident of alleged wallet stealing in which the Student was 
involved was not a manifestation of the Student&#8482;s di
sability.  Prior to the time of the incident, the 
Student had been identified as eligible to receive special education and related services and was receiving such services based on an identified learning disability.  The Parent questions whether the Student&#8482;s disabilities had been properly or fully identified.  By agreement of the parties, the 

Board suspended expulsion proceedings against the Student to permit the Parent to obtain an 
independent evaluation of the Student.  Once that evaluation was completed, the PPT was to 
reconvene to determine how to proceed.  One option was for the Board to conduct its own 
evaluation of the Student.     Pending the outcome of all of those activities, the Student, who had been suspended for 
the incident, would be receiving tutoring at home.  Although framed as a challenge to the 
manifestation determination, the Parent appears to have commenced due process primarily to 
secure an enhanced tutoring program for the Student during the interim period.   
  At the initial Pre-Hearing Conference on December 19, 2003, the parties advised that a 

PPT had been scheduled for January 6, 2004 to review the results of the evaluation obtained by 