October 29, 2003 -1- Final Decision and Order 03-320   STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. Waterbury Board of Education 
  Appearing on behalf of the Student: Surrogate Parent, Pro Se 
                 
   Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney Elaine M. Skoronski 
     Office of Corporation Counsel 
     City of Waterbury 
     236 Grand Street 
     Waterbury, CT  06702 
  Appearing before:    Attorney Christine B. Spak 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   A prehearing conference was conducted on October 10, 2003 and the Surrogate Parent (hereinafter, the Student) participated and indicated that the Student was on homebound 
instruction.  Both parties appeared for hearing.  At the outset of the hearing both parties 
were offered the opportunity to participate in a prehearing conference due to the fact that neither party had received notice for the first prehearing conference.  The Board indicated that they preferred to first attempt to negotiate a settlement directly with the Student 

without the participation of the Hearing Officer.  The Board also presented a Motion to Dismiss for reason that the matter was strictly a 504 matter and therefore the Hearing 
Officer lacked jurisdiction.  The Hearing Officer explained that it was her understanding that there was an issue of IDEA eligibility.  The parties were in disagreement as to the 
facts underlying the eligibility claim and whether it was properly before the Hearing 

Officer.  The parties were given an opportunity to resolve the matter as they had 
requested.  After a period of negotiation, they reported back that they had been successful in their negotiation.  It was agreed that there would be no ruling on the Motion to Dismiss 

as the settlement rendered a ruling unnecessary, and that the Hearing Officer should 
dismiss the case. 
 The Surrogate Parent requested that the Student be given an opportunity to speak on the record; there was no objection to this and she was allowed to do so.  She presented as an unusually mature, poised, and intelligent young woman who was confident she could 
