May 12, 2004 -1-                            Final Decision and Order 04-037 STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION     Student  v.  Naugatuck Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents: The Mother and Father pro se  Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Nicole A. Bernabo 
  Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Connon, LLC 
646 Prospect Avenue Hartford, CT  06105-4286   Appearing before:    Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer 
  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY   This hearing was requested on February 13, 2004.  Hearing Officer Exhibit (HO) 1.  This hearing officer was assigned to the case on that date.  A prehearing conference was held on February 26, 2004.  Hearing dates were scheduled for March 15 and 18.  The Board&#8482;s attorney offered to file exhibits by March 5 in order to avoid duplication of exhibits by the Parents.  The Parents filed their exhibits and witness list the same day.  
They also filed a copy of the SDE publication entitled The Connecticut Framework Preschool 
Curricular Goals and Benchmarks (1999), as 
well as a document which appeared to be a writte
n narrative of their claims in the case.  The 
Board's exhibits were B-1 through B-34. The Pa
rents' exhibits were P-1 through P-22.  The 
hearing convened on March 15.  The Parents appeared pro se.   The Hearing Officer permitted the parties to confer prior to the start of the hearing for purposes 
of a possible settlement.  No agreement was made
.  At the beginning of the hearing, the parties were asked for objections to exhibits.  The Board&#8482;s attorney objected to P-6, P-9, P-15, P-19, P-20 and P-21.  These exhibits were marked for id
entification only.  Most of the Parents&#8482; full Exhibits are duplicates or partial duplicates of Board Exhibits.  The Parents did not object to any of the Board's exhibits, which were accepted as fu
ll exhibits.   The Parents, through the Mother, made an opening statement.  The Board's attorney made an opening statement. 
 The Parents presented testimony from Joanne 
Conrad and Marion Zirolli, school speech and language pathologists, Karen Schiaroli, school psychologist, Robert Piola, Coordinator of Pupil Services, Laura Cyr, Director of Special Services, and the Mother. The Parents rested their case.  
None of the exhibits that were marked for id
entification were offered into evidence during the 
Parents' presentation.  They were advised and they
 agreed that that these exhibits would not be 
considered as evidence in the case decision.  During the hearing of March 15, an additional 