August 31, 2004 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-182   STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. West Hartford Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:    Father, pro se  Appearing on behalf of West Hartford Board:  Attorney Susan C. Freedman Attorney Julie C. Fay Shipman & Goodwin LLP One Constitution Plaza Hartford, CT  06103-1919    Appearing before:      Attorney Patricia M. Strong Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY   This hearing was requested on June 21, 2004.  Hearing Officer Exhibit 1.  This hearing officer was assigned to the case on June 22.  A prehearing conference was scheduled for July 6.  The Parent did not answer the telephone.  A new date was set for the prehearing on July 8.  At that prehearing, the Board raised the issue of jurisdiction and requested a schedule to file a Motion to Dismiss.  The request was granted and the Board was given two weeks or until July 22 to file the motion and a memorandum of law.  The Parent was given two weeks to respond to the motion.  He requested until August 9 when he returned from a trip out-of-state, which was granted.  A hearing was scheduled for August 23 on the jurisdictional issue only.  On July 22, the Board filed its Motion to Dismiss and memorandum of law.  On July 26 the Parent sent his response to the Hearing Officer by certified mail.  On August 23 the parties appeared at the hearing and requested time to discuss a settlement of the case.  The request was granted and after a length of time, the parties reported that a resolution was reached.  The Parent was asked on the record if he was satisfied with the settlement and he replied that if the Board did not satisfy his expectations, he wanted to proceed with the hearing.  The parties were advised the case would be dismissed without prejudice and that no ruling would be issued on the jurisdictional question.   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  It is ordered that this case shall be dismissed without prejudice.   