August 11, 2004 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-119  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Westport Board of Education  v.  Student Student  v.  Westport Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:  Attorney Howard Klebanoff Attorney Sally R. Zanger Klebanoff & Alfano, P.C. 433 South Main Street, Suite 102 West Hartford, CT  06110  Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Marsha Belman Moses Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 75 Broad Street Milford, CT  06460  Appearing before:    Attorney Patricia M. Strong Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY   The Board filed a hearing request on March 22, 2004.  The Board requested that scheduling of a hearing be postponed pending the outcome of mediation, which was held on May 6, 2004.  Following the unsuccessful mediation, the Parents presented to the Board their request for due process.  On May 7 the Board sent to the State Department of Education the Parents' request for due process and its request to schedule a hearing on the Board's due process case.  Hearing Officer Exhibit 1.  Another hearing officer was assigned to both cases on May 7.  She recused herself on June 6.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the cases on June 7.  A prehearing conference was held on June 17.  The parties requested an extension of the June 21 decision deadline so that they could schedule mutually convenient hearing dates.  The request was granted and the decision deadline was extended to September 23.  Hearing dates were agreed on for July 21 and August 30.  The parties filed witness lists and exhibits (five for Parents and 57 for Board) on July 14.  The hearing convened on July 21 with Atty. Zanger and the Mother present for the Parents and Atty. Moses and Ms. Gilchrist for the Board.  Atty. Zanger requested a postponement of the hearing because the Mother had been hospitalized the previous week and did not feel well enough to testify.  She stated that she had notified the Board&#8482;s attorney the previous afternoon that she would request a postponement.  The Board   