May 10, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-217 STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. Norwalk Board of Education       
 Appearing on behalf of the Parent:  Attorney Thomas J. O&#8482;Neill, Day, Berry & Howard, 
LLP, One Canterbury Green, Stamford, CT  06901 
 Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Marsha Belman Moses, Berchem, Moses & 

Devlin, P.C., 75 Broad Street, Milford, CT  06460  Appearing before:  Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer 
  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  ISSUES:  1. Whether the Board&#8482;s Program for the 
Student for the 2004-2005 school year is appropriate.  2.  If not, whether the Parent&#8482;s proposed placement of the Student at the New York 
School for the Deaf is appropriate.  SUMMARY:  The hearing impaired six year old Student who is profoundly deaf, and 
communicates through signing, has been placed in the Board&#8482;s program which provides 
15 hours of instruction from a teacher of the hearing impaired, speech and language 
services, and mainstreaming for specials.  A sign language interpreter is available for the 
Student, but also has job responsibilities of serving as a lunchroom and classroom aide.   
The Board had also proposed transporting the Student more than one hour each way to a 

program at the American School for the Deaf and offered a program at another 
elementary school with fewer hours with the teacher of the hearing impaired.   
 An evaluation completed by the American School for the Deaf found that the 
Student&#8482;s expressive vocabulary skills were significantly delayed, testing at the 5
th percentile.  The ASD evaluators recommended that the Student would benefit from 

placement in an educational environment which emphasizes development of expressive 
and receptive language skills through signed communication and English.  They further 
recommended that the youngster required exposure to conceptually correct American 
Sign Language as well as English word order and syntax.  True use of a total 
communication philosophy was highly recommended, and the evaluators suggested that 
placement with hearing impaired same age peers might be necessary to facilitate 
language development. 
