December 30, 2004 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-218/239  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION    Norwalk Board of Education v. Student Student v. Norwalk Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:   Attorney Howard Klebanoff Klebanoff & Alfano, P.C. 433 South Main Street, Suite 102 West Hartford, CT  06110  Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney. Marsha Belman Moses Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 75 Broad Street Milford,  CT 06460  Appearing before:     Attorney Patricia M. Strong Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY   On July 9, 2004 the Board of Education filed a due process request seeking a determination that the Board's evaluations were appropriate and that the Board need not pay for an independent psycho-educational evaluation.  Hearing Officer Exhibit (HO) 1.  This case (04-218) was assigned to another Hearing Officer.  On July 19 the Parents filed a due process request seeking funding for a unilateral placement at Eagle Hill School, Greenwich, and an independent evaluation.  The Parents also requested that their case be consolidated with the Board's case.  Exhibit HO 2.  The Parents' case (04-239) was assigned to this Hearing Officer.  On July 26 this Hearing Officer wrote to the parties to notify them that the Parents' motion to consolidate was granted and that she would hear both cases.  A prehearing conference on both cases was held on July 30.  September 13 and October 6 were agreed upon as hearing dates.  The Parents&#8482; attorney filed a motion to extend the decision deadline from September 3 to October 8, which was granted.  The Parents and Board respectively filed hearing exhibits and witness lists with the Hearing Officer prior to the first hearing date.  On September 13 the parties appeared for the hearing and requested time to discuss a settlement.  After a period of time, the hearing convened on the record.  The parties reported that the Parents withdrew their request for an independent evaluation and that the Mother had signed the necessary consent forms for the Board's evaluations.  The Board's attorney stated that she wished to withdraw the Board's due process request.  The parties requested a 60-day postponement in order to   