November 8, 2004 -1-                            Final Decision and Order 04-310   STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. Norwich Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Student:  Parent, Pro Se 
 Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Linda L. Yoder 
      Shipman & Goodwin LLP 
      One Constitution Plaza 
      Hartford, CT  06103-1919 
 Appearing before:    Attorney Christine B. Spak 
      Hearing Officer 
 FINAL DECISION    The Norwich Board of Education (&#64257;the Board&#64258;) moved to dismiss the above referenced due 
process hearing in its entirety on the grounds that the Parent has failed to raise any issues upon which relief may be granted.  The parties convened on October 18, 2004 for the first day of hearing 

and at that time testimony was heard from the mother and from Lanie Kochanski, the Board&#8482;s 
Director.  For reasons that follow a bench decision was made which granted the Motion to Dismiss 
with the understanding that this written ruling would follow.  Although the facts have changed in this matter since the evidence closed in the prior case (as 

is discussed below), the issues as stated by the Parent are the same issues raised and ruled upon in a 
prior recent due process hearing. Res judicata bars the Parent from raising the same issues already 
decided by State of Connecticut Administrative Du
e Process Hearing Officer Deborah Kearns in Case No. 03-310.  That decision issued on or about August 17, 2004 and the request for the instant due process hearing was made on or about September 10, 2004.   
 The student has been excluded from school since October 23, 
2003. There has been some 
tutoring but of late that has broken down. At hearing the parties agreed that the Board would send the social worker Lisa Allen and another staff member to the student&#8482;s home to encourage him to 
participate in both the tutoring and the evaluation and support him in doing so.   
 In the prior matter Hearing Officer Kearns ruled that a risk assessment and a psychiatric 

evaluation shall be performed by a specific doctor (Dr. Jamison).  After the close of testimony in the 
prior case, but before the decision issued, the mother, anxious for the student to be readmitted to 
school for the fall 2004 term, had a risk assessment performed by the Yale Child Study Center. The 

mother testified that because the decision was late in issuing and sensing which direction the 
decision would fall, she was concerned that there would not be time to evaluate the student if the 
mother waited for the decision.  However, the Board was not informed of the risk assessment until 

after it was completed, was not contacted by the evaluator and consequently did not participate.  A 
one paragraph report by the evaluator, Lisa Lochner, MSW implied that the student presented no 
risk &#64257;[the student] did express remorse about singing a rap song with the word &#64257;gun&#64258; in it while in 

the classroom.&#64258;  She further reported that th
e student reported &#64257;feeling happy and hopeful about 