May 27, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-332  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION  Student v. Stratford Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parent:  Attorney Catherine L. Williams, Connecticut Legal 
Services, 211 State Street, Bridgeport, CT  06604  Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Michelle C. Laubin, Berchem, Moses & 
Devlin, P.C., 75 Broad Street, Milford, CT  06460  Appearing before:  Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer 
  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  ISSUES:  1. Whether the Board failed to provide a free appropriate public education to the 
Student from the fall 2002 through the 2004-2005 school year. 
2. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education.
1  SUMMARY:   The 15 year old eighth grade Student has 
been enrolled in the Board schools since his sixth grade year.  The Student has been identified as eligible for special education and 
related services due to his specific learning disability.  The Student&#8482;s achievement scores 

continue to show significant deficits in reading and written language.  The Student was expelled from school from May 2004 until th
e end of the school year, and received inconsistent tutoring during the time of hi
s expulsion.  The Parent brought this action claiming various procedural violations and de
nial of a free appropriate public education from the fall 2002 through the current school y
ear, including the period of the Student&#8482;s expulsion, as the Student has not demonstr
ated progress in his reading and written expression.  PROCEDURAL HISTORY:  The Parent requested this hearing on October 13, and a prehearing conference was held on October 19.   The parties initially requested an extension of the mailing date of the 
decision to allow for settlement discussions, and the first hearing date of November 30 

was scheduled.  At the hearing on November
 30, the attorneys for the parties reported that an evaluation of the Student was pending, and the Parent&#8482;s attorney requested an                                                  1 A third issue was presented in this matter.  That issue was: whether the Student shall be provided an 
independent evaluation.  The parties came to an agreement regarding this issue, and on the first day of 
hearing, the Parent&#8482;s attorney confirmed that the Parent was no longer pursuing that issue. 
