February 7, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-364  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Amity Regional School District No. 5  v.  Student  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:  Parents pro se  Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Gwendolyn K. McDonald      Office of Protection and Advocacy      60B Weston Street      Hartford, CT  06120-1551       Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig S. Meuser      Shipman & Goodwin LLP      One Constitution Plaza      Hartford, CT  06103-1919  Appearing before:    Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  PROCEDURAL HISTORY   On November 15, 2004 the Board of Education filed a due process request seeking to override the Parents' refusal to permit the district to speak with the Student's physicians in order to learn how her alleged medical condition may affect her ability to receive an education in the least restrictive environment at Amity High School and to override Parents' refusal to make the Student available to receive educational services at Amity High School.  Hearing Officer ("HO") Exhibit 1.  On November 24 a prehearing conference was held.  Attorney McDonald, who was originally representing the family, stated that the Parents would sign the requested medical releases.  Attorney McDonald indicated there were additional issues the family wished to raise.  Hearing dates were agreed on for December 13 and 22.  On November 26 the Board's attorney requested a postponement of the December 13 hearing because the Acting Director of Pupil Personnel Services was not available on that date.  The request was granted.  On December 6 the Parents' attorney filed a Request for Inspection and Change in Hearing Location asking for an order to permit her to test and inspect the air quality at Amity High School and to change the location of the hearing from Amity High School to another location.  On December 7 the Board's attorney filed an objection to the request for an inspection, but offered to look for another hearing location.  The Board's attorney also objected to Attorney McDonald representing the Parents and the Student.  On December 13 the Board's attorney sent a letter offering two alternate locations for the hearing.  On December 15 the Parents' attorney wrote a letter setting forth the issue of   