February 2, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 04-384  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION  Waterford Board of Education v. Student  
 Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Lawrence J. Campane 
     Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Connon, LLC 
     646 Prospect Avenue 
     Hartford, CT  06105-4286 
 Appearing on behalf of the Parent:   The Parent was 
pro se1  Appearing before:     Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  ISSUE:  Whether the Board is entitled to conduct an evaluation of the Student in the absence of 
parental consent.  PROCEDURAL HISTORY:  The Board requested this hearing on December 9, 2004.  A prehearing conference was 

held on December 15.  The Parent was not present for the first prehearing, and no request 
for rescheduling of the prehearing was received from the Parent.  In addition, the notice 
of the prehearing was sent via first class mail,
 and was not returned as undeliverable.  The Board principal confirmed on the record at the hearing that the Parent&#8482;s address was 

accurate in their records, and that the Board was able to communicate with the Parent at 

that address.  The prehearing conference proceeded with the Board&#8482;s attorney only in accordance with Conn. Regs. Agencies Sec. 10-76h-7(c) which provides that if a party fails to participate in a prehearing conference, the hearing officer may proceed with the 
conference.  As a courtesy to the Parent, an additional prehearing conference was held on December 
20.  Despite the notice of the prehearing, the Parent was not present for this second prehearing conference.  Notice of the scheduled hearing date was forwarded to the parties, and the hearing convened in accordance with the notice of hearing on January 20.    The Parent did not appear at the hearing on January 20, and the Board attorney was directed by the hearing officer to contact the Parent to determine whether she intended to appear at the hearing.  
                                                 1 The Parent failed to appear 
at the duly noticed hearing. 