July 18, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 05-075  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. Torrington Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents:   Attorney Rachel M. Baird 
  Law Offices of Rachel M. Baird 
Stonegate Professional Building   379 Prospect Street 
  Torrington, CT  06790-5239 
 Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney Michelle C. Laubin 
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 
75 Broad Street Milford, CT  06460  Appearing before:     Attorney Patricia M. Strong 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  PROCEDURAL HISTORY   On March 29, 2005 the Parents filed a due process request seeking an out-of-district placement and other relief for the Student, who has a language impairment disorder.  A 
prehearing conference was held on April 6 at which time the Board was represented by 
another law firm.  Hearing dates were scheduled for May 12 and 16 and the decision 
deadline was extended from May 13 to June 13 at the request of the Parents' attorney.  On 
April 19 Atty. Laubin appeared for the Board and advised the Hearing Officer that she 
had a conflict on May 16.  On April 28 the Parents' attorney wrote a letter to the Hearing 
Officer requesting that the May 12 hearing be postponed so that the parties could use the date for mediation.  On May 5 the postponements of the May 12 and 16 hearing dates 
were granted, the hearing was rescheduled for June 20 and the decision deadline was extended to July 28 at the parties' request.  On June 2 the Parents' attorney requested a 

postponement of the June 20 hearing because she had to appear in U.S. District Court 
with another client on that date.  The Board's attorney did not object to the postponement, 
which was granted.  The case was rescheduled for July 6 and the deadline was extended 
to August 1.  The parties participated in a mediation on June 8, but did not reach an 
agreement.  On June 29 the Board filed hearing exhibits and a witness list with the 
Hearing Officer.  The Parents filed a supplemental witness list to the Board's list and no 
exhibits.  On July 6 the parties appeared for the hearing and indicated that they had reached a settlement.  The hearing convened on the record.  The parties reported that the 

agreement was reduced to writing, that the Father, who was not present at the hearing, 
