February 10, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 05-001  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. West Haven Board of Education 
 Appearing on behalf of the Student:  Pro Se 
        Appearing on behalf of the Board:     Attorney Michelle C. Laubin  
      Berchem, Moses and Devlin, P.C. 
      75 Broad Street 
      Milford, CT  06460 
 Appearing before:     Attorney Christine B. Spak 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   The prehearing conference in this matter was held on January 12, 2005 and both parties 
participated and a hearing date was scheduled for February 3, 2005.  During the prehearing conference the parties  indicated a willingness to attempt to resolve this matter 
through mediation and a mediation was subsequently scheduled prior to the date of 
hearing.  The mediation did not resolve the matter.  On January 31, 2005 the Board filed 
a Motion to Dismiss for reasons that the moving party might not have standing for reason 
that they might not be the parent or guardian and for reason that the hearing officer does 
not have the authority to grant the desired relief.  The Motion was filed less than seven business days but the Parent did respond in writing with a one page letter filed on February 1, 2005.  It was unclear whether this was intended to be an Objection to the Motion.  At hearing the Parent was given the opportunity for an extension of time to 

respond more completely to the Motion, and was offered a continuance of the hearing so 
that she would have adequate time to do this.  The Board did not object to this.  The 
Parent declined indicating she did not need the additional time.   
 At hearing the first issue of the Parent&#8482;s legal identity, which issue derived from a 

similarity with a twin&#8482;s name, was resolved to the satisfaction of the hearing officer, 
without objection from the Board, and the Parent was allowed to proceed in her 
representation of the student.  The second issue was more complicated.  The Parent&#8482;s 
position was that there had been a violation of the student&#8482;s due process rights, alleging that an administrator had repeatedly misstated the correct procedure in regard to writing 

down a refusal of an agreement.  However, at hearing the Parent agreed that she did not 
want the student&#8482;s current out-of-district program altered in any manner at the present 
time.  The authority of the hearing officer was discussed and the Parent was given a copy 
of the opening statement which summarizes the hearing officer&#8482;s authority in these types 
