April 4, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 05-033  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. Woodbridge Board of Education 
 Appearing on behalf of the Parents:   Parents, pro se  
 Appearing on behalf of Board: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses 
     Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 
     75 Broad Street 
     Milford, CT  06460   
 Appearing before:    Attorney Patricia M. Strong 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY   The Mother filed a hearing request on February 9, 2005.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on February 14.  A prehearing conference was scheduled on February 21.  On February 16, the Mother telephoned the Hearing Officer and asked to cancel the prehearing conference.  She was advised to make a written request and send it 
to the Board's attorney who had filed an appearance on February 14.  She was also 
advised that the Hearing Officer could not speak with her without the Board attorney, but 

she could call Mr. Thomas Badway at the State Department of Education with any 
questions.  A letter from the Parents stating that they wished to cancel the prehearing 
conference was mailed on February 17 and received by the Hearing Officer in the mail on 
Saturday, February 19.  The letter did not indicate that a copy was sent to the Board's 
attorney.  On February 21, the Hearing Officer made several telephone calls to the 

Board's attorney in an attempt to convene the prehearing conference, but was unable to 
reach her.  Voice mail messages were left on her cell and office telephone numbers.  On 
February 22, the Board's attorney wrote to 
the Hearing Officer and apologized for not being available the previous day.  On February 23, the Hearing Officer spoke to Mr. Badway who stated that the Mother had called him and indicated that she wished to 

withdraw the due process request.  The Hearing Officer wrote to the parties and advised 
them that the prehearing conference would not be rescheduled and that the case would be 
dismissed without prejudice.   
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  It is ordered that this case is dismissed without prejudice. 
