June 28, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 05-133  STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Student v. Barkhamsted Board of Education 
 Appearing on behalf of the Student:         Parent, Pro Se 
        Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education:   Attorney William R. Connon 
       Sullivan, Schoen, Campane 
          & Connon, LLC 
646 Prospect Avenue Hartford, CT  06105-4286  Appearing before:         Attorney Christine B. Spak 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER       A prehearing conference was conducted on June 9, 2005.  Both parties participated, the Mother representing the Student and the Board represented through counsel.  The Parent is the moving party in this matter. At this lengthy prehearing conference the parties 
agreed to the hearing date of June 20, 2005 at 10:15 a.m.  They further agreed to waive 
the five day rule for the exchange of exhibits and witness lists.  The parties were informed that given the Parent has access to a fax machine for the sending of materials 

but not for the receipt of materials, first class mail would be used to send materials, 
including notices, to the Parent at the address of her choice and this was done with the notice of hearing.  It was further explained to the parties that anything faxed or mailed to 
the hearing officer must be faxed or mailed to the other side at the same time.   
 At the prehearing the Board indicated that they would be filing a brief on the issue of whether the Parent has an absolute right to have her minor children, the youngest being 
seven years old, to attend PPTs and the hearing, and whether this changes at all if the three children are to be called as witnesses at the hearing.  At the prehearing it was explained to the Parent that she could also brief the issue and if she chose to do so, her brief should also be received on or before June 15, 2005, the date agreed to by the parties.   A Motion to Dismiss and brief were filed 
by the Board on June 15, 2005.  No reply brief was received from the Parent.   
 At the prehearing the Parent had  indicated she intended to call fourteen witnesses and it 
was explained that this is an unusually large number to be called by one side in a due 
process hearing and this being the case the date for mailing of the final decision would 
have to be extended to accommodate additional hearing dates and the realistic 
