October 12, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 05-199   STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION    Student v. Woodbridge Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney Andrew A. Feinstein, Law Offices of David C. Shaw, LLC, 34 Jerome Avenue, Suite 210, Bloomfield, CT 06002  Appearing on behalf of Woodbridge Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses, Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C., 75 Broad Street, Milford, CT 06460  Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER   PROCEDURAL HISTORY   The Parents filed a due process hearing request on June 30, 2005.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on July 5, 2005.  A prehearing conference was held on July 11. At the prehearing conference the Board's attorney requested that the references to a confidential settlement between the parties be deleted from the due process request.  The Board also wanted to raise an issue for hearing that the Parents had failed to make the Student available for an evaluation.  The Parents' attorney agreed to and did file an amended due process request on July 11.  The Parents' attorney also requested an extension of the August 15 decision deadline in order to accommodate agreed upon hearing dates, which were September 6, 15, 16, 29 and 30, 2005.  The motion to extend the decision deadline to October 24 was granted.  On July 12 the Board's attorney filed a Motion in Limine seeking to strike from the record and prohibit from introduction into the record in the future any reference to terms and conditions of any settlement agreement between the parties.  The Parents' attorney requested until July 20 to file an opposition the Motion in Limine, which was granted.  The opposition brief and attachments were filed on July 19.  The Board's attorney filed a Motion for Clarification and/or Request to Revise on July 28 seeking an order that Parents clarify and/or revise the statement of issues being submitted to the Hearing Officer by specifying whether they are seeking enforcement by the Hearing Officer of the settlement agreement.  On July 29, the Parents' attorney filed an Opposition to the Board's July 28 Motion.  On August 4, the Hearing Officer issued a decision granting the Motion in Limine and denying the Motion for Clarification as moot.  Several portions were stricken from the amended due process request dated July 11.  The Parents' attorney was directly to file an amended request for   