September 26, 2005 -1- Final Decision and Order 05-217    STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Appearing on behalf of the Parents and Student: pro se  Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education:  Attorney Michelle C. Laubin  
       Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 
       75 Broad Street 
       Milford, CT  06460 
      Appearing before:      Attorney Deborah R. Kearns 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  ISSUE  I. Whether the local educational agency Motion to Dismiss should be granted? 
 PROCEDURAL HISTORY  On July 12, 2005 the parent and their non-minor child filed a Request for Mediation. At a 
prehearing conference the parent stated they wanted to pursue mediation, they were told a 
hearing date would be scheduled which allowed time to hold a mediation session with the 
State Department of Education (SDE).  The matter was assigned a hearing date of August 
30, 2005.  The local education agency (LEA) made a sufficiency challenge pursuant to 
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act &#167; 615(c)(2) which requires 

the Request for a Special Education Hearing filed pursuant to section 615(b)(7)(A), to sufficiently set forth a proposed resolution to the dispute. There is no such provision to challenge the sufficiency of a request for mediation. The hearing convened to address all 
preliminary matters.  On the date of hearing the parent/child did not appear, the local 
education agency (LEA) requested the opportunity to argue the LEA&#8482;s Motion to 
Dismiss.  The parent/child did not file an objection to the Motion to Dismiss. 
 FINDINGS OF FACT  1. The parent and their non-minor child wanted to meet with the LEA to discuss 
an aspect of a matter previously resolved in a December, 2003 settlement 
agreement.  The LEA refused to meet with the parent/child. The parent/child 
then filed a Request for Mediation with the State Department of Education, 
page one is a Request for Mediation form; page two is a Request for Special 
