June 21, 2006 -1- Final Decision and Order 06-104 
 STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION   Putnam Board of Education v. Student 
 Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Mother, pro se  Appearing on behalf of Putnam Board of Education: Attorney. Frederick L. Dorsey, 
Siegel, O&#8482;Connor, O'Donnell & Beck, P.C., 
150 Trumbull Street, Hartford, CT  06103  
 Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  PROCEDURAL HISTORY   The Board filed a due process hearing request with the State Department of Education 
(SDE) on April 19, 2006 following unsuccessful efforts at resolution with the Parent (Mother).  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on that date.  On April 28, a prehearing conference was scheduled for May 5.  The prehearing notice to the Parent was returned to the Hearing Officer by the Post Office, which noted that the forwarding order had expired, but provided a post office box number.  On May 1 another prehearing notice 
was mailed to the Parent at the post office box 
address.  On May 2 the Board's attorney's 
assistant wrote to the Hearing Officer requesting a change in the prehearing conference to May 4.  The Hearing Officer asked her to call the Parent to see if was convenient for her.  

On May 3 the Parent faxed a letter to the 
Hearing Officer stating that she was not available on May 4 and requested the prehearing to be scheduled on a Monday or 
Tuesday.  The prehearing was rescheduled for Monday, May 8.  At the prehearing conference the Board's attorney stated that
 the Student had been placed in an out-of-
district placement by another school district, 
then moved to Putnam last year and was 
exited from special education.  The issue in
 this hearing is eligibility for special education.  The Mother stated that she was withdrawing the Student from the Putnam 
district and did not wish to pursue a hearing.  She was asked to send a letter.  On May 10 
the Hearing Officer received a letter from the 
Parent indicating that the Student will not be attending Putnam High School, that she 
will be removing his school records from 
there and that she did not need due process.  The decision deadline in this hearing is July 3, 2006.  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER  It is ordered that this case be dismissed. 
  