November 14, 2006 
 Final Decision and Order 06-298 
- 1 -STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
   Student v. Redding Board of Education 
 Appearing on behalf of the Student:  Parent, pro se 
     
Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Marsha Belman Moses 
      Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 
      75 Broad Street 
      Milford, Connecticut  06460 
    Appearing before:     Attorney Christine B. Spak 
       Hearing Officer 
     FINAL DECISION  
 The prehearing in this matter was conduc
ted on October 4, 2006.  Both parties participated and a hearing date that the parties agreed upon was selected.  The hearing date allowed time for the parties to partic
ipate in mediation, wh
ich they did, although mediation was not successful in resolving the i
ssues.  The issues in dispute were a failure to properly place and program and compensation for the private placement and services 
provided by the parent for the 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 school years.  The Board filed a Sufficiency Challenge and a Motion to Dismi
ss.  The Parent&#8482;s request for hearing was found to be sufficient and the Motion to Dismiss was denied.  The Board requested a 

continuance for time to prepare for hearing 
and before the Hearing Officer responded the Parent asked for a request for a continuance by fax, dated November 8, 2006, to allow the 
Parent to receive all requested documents and because she requested an Advisory 

Opinion.  On her original request for hearing the Parent had already agreed to an Advisory Opinion and the Board had declined to agree.  Therefore, given that the 
Advisory Opinion process is one that must be 
agreed to by the parties, this reason is not an appropriate basis on which to grant a continuance.  After the Parent filed their request 
for hearing the Board objected to a continuance being granted, and given the short time 
frame in which these requests were filed, the 
parties convened for the first day of hearing.  At hearing the Parent indicated she want
ed to withdraw if she was not given a continuance because she was consulting attorn
eys and may retain one to represent the 
Student in this matter. She indicated that 
she thought that basis had been communicated 
in her correspondence.  The correspondence was reviewed and it revealed that the need to obtain records and the desire for an Advisory Opinion were the two bases for the 
continuance request.  The Parent explained that she was 
waiting for the Board records 
(which were available to her from the Thur
sday before the Monday hearing, although she  