December 13, 2006 
 Final Decision and Order 06-299 
- 1 -
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Student v. Greenwich Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Atty. Nora A. Belanger, Law Office of Nora A. 
Belanger, L.L.C., 10 Wall 
Street, Norwalk, CT 06850  Appearing on behalf of the Greenwich Board of Education: Attys. Susan C. Freedman 
and Andreana Bellach, Shipman & Goodwin 
LLP, One Constitution Plaza, Hartford, CT  
06103  Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
 This hearing was requested on October 2, 2006 by letter to the State Department of 
Education ("SDE").  The Board received the 
hearing request on the same date.  This 
hearing officer was assigned to the case on October 3.  On October 6, Attys. Freedman 
and Bellach appeared for the Board and filed a Motion to Strike the due process request.  
On October 10 the Board's attorneys filed a 
Motion to Dismiss the claims under Section 
504 of the Rehabilitation Act and the No Child Left Behind Act.  On October 11 the Parents' attorney filed an Objection to the 
Motion to Strike.  On October 13 the Parents' 
attorney filed an Objection to the Motion to
 Dismiss.  A prehearing conference was held 
on October 17.  The attorneys advised the Hearing Officer that mediation was scheduled 
on October 24.  The Parents' attorney agreed
 to file an amended hearing request on 
October 27 if the parties did not reach a settlement at mediation.  The Board's attorneys 
were allowed to file motions directed to th
e amended complaint.  No decision was issued 
on the Board's motions.  The decision deadline was set at December 18, 2006.  Hearing 
dates were agreed on for November 16 and 
December 4.  On October 25 the SDE advised the Hearing Officer that the parties reached a settlement of all claims on October 24.  On 
October 31, the Parents' attorn
ey wrote to the Hearing Officer that the hearing request 
was withdrawn with prejudice.   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 It is ordered that this case sh
all be dismissed with prejudice. 
  