January 24, 2007  Final Decision and Order 06-330 
- 1 -
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Student v. Newtown Board of Education  Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Atty. Nora A. Belanger, Law Office of Nora A. 
Belanger, L.L.C., 10 Wall 
Street, Norwalk, CT 06850  Appearing on behalf of the Newtown Board of Education: Atty. Michelle C. Laubin, Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C., 75 Broad Street, Milford, CT 06460 
 Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
 This hearing was requested on November 20, 2006 by letter to the State Department of 
Education ("SDE").  On November 21, the Parent
s' attorney filed a substitute page of the 
six-page complaint.  The Board's attorney re
ceived the hearing request on November 22.  
This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on November 24.  On November 30 the 
Parents' attorney filed a modified due pr
ocess request with consent of the Board's 
attorney.  A prehearing conf
erence was held on December 11. 
 The attorneys advised the 
Hearing Officer that they had agreed to mediation. The decision deadline was set at 
February 5, 2007.  Hearing dates were agreed on for January 22 and 25.  On January 10, the Board's attorney sent a letter to the Hear
ing Officer reporting that the parties settled 
the case and that the Parents had withdrawn th
e due process request with prejudice.  On 
January 11 the SDE advised the Hearing Officer that the parties reached an agreement on 
January 9 and had withdrawn the hearing request with prej
udice.  On January 17 the 
Board's attorney sent a second 
letter requesting that the hearing dates be cancelled and that the case be dismissed.  On January 18 th
e Hearing Officer sent
 the parties a letter 
advising them that the hearing dates were can
celled and that an order would be issued dismissing the case with prejudice.  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 It is ordered that this case sh
all be dismissed with prejudice. 
   - 1 -
