May 7, 2007  Final Decision and Order 07-077 
- 1 -   STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Student v. Enfield Board of Education 
 Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Father, pro se  Appearing on behalf of the Enfield Board of Education: Atty. Rebecca R. Santiago, Shipman & Goodwin LLP, One Cons
titution Plaza, Hartford, CT 06103-1919 
 Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
 This hearing was requested on March 20, 2007 by the Parents (Father), who sent a form 
to the State Department of Education ("SDE").
  The Board's attorney received the hearing 
request on March 21.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to 
the case on that date.  On March 23, the Board's attorney submitted a suffici
ency challenge to the hearing request.  
On March 30, the Hearing Officer found that the hearing request did not meet the notice 
requirements for a hearing in that it was lacki
ng a description of the nature of the problem of the child relating to such proposed initiation or change and a proposed resolution of the problem to the extent known and available 
to the requesting party at the time.  The 
Parents were given 30 days, or until April 30, in which to file a resubmitted notice with 
the Hearing Officer.    On April 1 the Father faxed 24 pages of documents to the Hearing Officer, along 
with a letter stating that the Parents wished
 to have the Hearing Officer interview the 
Student and to allow the Parents to cross-examine the Board's staff under oath.  On April 

11, the Hearing Officer wrote to the parties and advised the Parents that the April 1 submission did not comply with the Response 
to the Board's Sufficiency Challenge.  The 
Parents were advised again that they had until April 30 to submit an appropriate hearing 

request.  On April 12, the Board's attorney f
iled a motion to dismiss because the Parent 
has failed to set forth any cognizable claim that a Hearing O
fficer would have jurisdiction to decide in an impartial special education 
hearing held pursuant to the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA).  The Parents have not filed any response to the  