May 24, 2007 -1- Final Decision and Order 07-086  STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  X Board of Education v. Student  Appearing for the Board:  William Connon, Esq. 
Sullivan Schoen Campane & Connon 
646 Prospect Avenue Hartford, CT 06105  Appearing for the Student:  Mother, appearing 
pro se  Appearing Before:   Hearing Officer 
Scott P. Myers, M.A. (Clinical  
     Psychology), J.D. 
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
  ISSUE SET FOR HEARING  Whether the Board may proceed to eval
uate the Student over the Mother&#8482;s 
objection.  SUMMARY/OVERVIEW The Board commenced this hearing to obt
ain an order authorizing it to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the Student to de
termine the causes of his behavioral issues 
and his eligibility for special education and 
related services.  For the reasons set forth 
more fully herein, the Board may proceed with
 an evaluation of the Student as directed 
herein and regardless of whether the Mother consents or does not consent to the evaluation.  The Hearing Officer is hopeful 
that the Mother will recognize the potential 
for the evaluation to benefit the Student and 
ease his stress and anxi
ety in school, and will cooperate with the Board in completing the evaluation.     
 The Student is an 11 year old 6th grader attending X Middle School (&#64257;XMS&#64258;), a 
public school operated by the Board.  Despite a confirmed history of
 ability to perform grade level work, the Student has had since kindergarten a consistent history of behavioral difficulties at school that have a
dversely impacted and continue to adversely 
impact his education and academic performa
nce, and now increasingly on his peer 
relationships. These difficulties have not been resolved through the implementation  of 
the regular classroom interventions that the St
udent&#8482;s mother (the &#64257;Mother&#64258; or &#64257;Parent&#64258;) 
has agreed may be implemented.  The Student 
continues to manifest increasingly severe 
and pervasive behavioral difficulties with the 
result, among other things, that he may very 
well fail the 6
th grade despite having the apparent ability to complete the work.  He is 
becoming increasingly socially isolated from
 his peers and is incurring disciplinary referrals for behaviors that are likely a manifestation of a di
sability, including behaviors that put him at risk for danger. 
