September 20, 2007 
 Final Decision and Order 07-156 
- 1 -
  STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Student v. Stamford Board of Education 
 Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Atty. Robert A. Martinik, Jr., Nine Woods End Road, Darien, CT 06820  Appearing on behalf of the Stamford Board 
of Education: Atty. Andreana R. Bellach, Shipman & Goodwin LLP, 300 Atlantic Street, Stamford, CT  06901 
 Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
 The Parents requested this hearing on June 7, 2007 by letter to the State Department of 
Education ("SDE").  The Board of Education received a copy on June 11.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on June 7.  Atty. Bellach filed an appearance for the 
Board on June 25.  A prehearing conference was held on June 29.  The mailing date for 
the final decision was set at August 27, 2007.  The parties' attorneys agreed to seek a 
mediation date in late July.  
One hearing date was agreed on for September 5.  On July 6, 
the Parents' attorney sent a letter requesting 
a 30-day extension of the mailing date of the 
final decision to accommodate the parties'
 vacation schedules, the scheduling of a 
mediation date and the September hearing da
te.  The request was granted and the mailing 
date was extended to September 26. 
 On July 27, the SDE advised the Hearing Officer that the 
mediation was scheduled on 
August 31.  On August 20, the Board's attorney, 
with consent of the Parents' attorney,  
requested a postponement of the September 5 
hearing date to allow time to prepare for the hearing if the case was not
 settled at the mediation.  
The postponement was granted, 
the hearing was rescheduled for September 20 
and the mailing date of the final decision 
was extended to October 15.  On September 4, the SDE notified the Hearing Officer that 

the parties had reached an agreement at th
e mediation.  On September 4, the Parents' 
attorney wrote to the Hearing Officer and 
reported that the parties had reached an agreement and requested that the case be withdrawn with prejudice.  The September 20 

hearing was canceled.  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 It is ordered that this case shall be dismissed with prejudice. 
  