October 11, 2007  Final Decision and Order 07-264 
- 1 -
  
 STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Student v. Wolcott Board of Education 
 
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Student, pro se  
Appearing on behalf of the Wo
lcott Board of Education: Atty. Craig S. Meuser, Chinni & Meuser LLC, 30 Avon Meadow Lane, Avon, CT  06001 

 
Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 
ISSUES 
 
 1. Should the Student have 
received his high school diploma in June 2007 or 
continued receiving special education services from the Board? 
 
 2. Does the Student's complaint meet the sufficiency requirements of IDEA? 

 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
 The Student requested this hearing on August 22 by faxing a complaint form to 
the Wolcott Board of Education's Director of
 Student Services ("Director") and to the State Department of Education ("SDE").  This
 Hearing Officer was assigned to the case 
on August 24.  On that date, the Director sent an appearance letter to the Hearing Officer 
and stated that the Board would raise a 
sufficiency challenge at the prehearing 
conference.  A notice of the prehearing conference was sent to the parties on August 27.  
The Director was advised to have the Boar
d's attorney file an appearance unless he 

planned to represent the Board at the heari
ng.  Atty. Meuser filed an appearance on August 28.  A prehearing conference was held on September 7 with Atty. Meuser.  The 
Student was not at home and a message was le
ft with his mother.  The decision deadline 
was set at November 5, 2007.  A hearing date 
was scheduled for October 16.  Later in the day, the Student telephoned the Hearing Officer and left a message that he would be 
withdrawing his complaint.  The Hearing Officer wrote to the parties on September 12 

and advised them that if the Student had not
 sent a written withdrawal by September 17, a 
hearing notice would be issued for October 16.  On September 18, Atty. Meuser faxed the 
Hearing Officer a copy of a w
ithdrawal letter from the Student indicating that he and his 
Father had signed a resolution agreement with 
the Board, that he wished to withdraw his 
due process request and that the case should be dismissed with prejudice. 
   