November 14, 2008 
 Final Decision and Order 07-353 
- 1 - STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    
Appearing on behalf of the Parent:    
pro se  
Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education:  Attorney Rachel Kuschel 
       Durant Nichols & Houston 

       1057 Broad ST.  

       Bridgeport, CT 06604 

 
Appearing before:      Attorney Deborah R. Kearns 
Hearing Officer  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 
 
ISSUES:  Whether the parent is entitled to 
reimbursement for the cost out-of-district 
tutorial services parent
 provided for the Student?  
PROCEDURAL HISTORY: The parent ma
de a claim for Due Process seeking 

reimbursement for sums spent on private tutorial
 services with an out-of-district provider.  
The matter was consolidated with Case No. 
07-352, regarding Student&#8482;s sibling.  It was 
determined and agreed, the parties could adhere
 to a format which provides for a separate 
hearing, record, and decision for the individual students.  The parties agreed to extend the date for mailing the final decision to accomm
odate scheduled hearing dates and briefs. The following witnesses testified at the hear
ing:  Peter Bartoli, Kathy Baird, Brenda Schideler, Maureen Sullivan, Barbara Denver and the parent.  The date for mailing the 

final decision is November 15, 2008.   

 
SUMMARY:  The Student was identified as a 
child in need of sp
ecial education and related services from the second grade to the eighth grade.  He was exited from special 

education at the parent&#8482;s request on Oct
ober 25, 2007.  Student earned average to honor-roll grades during the time the Student fully pa
rticipated in the school district&#8482;s special education program. In September 2006, Student&#8482;s
 parent excused him from attending the 
resource room portion of his special education program.  After seven months and some 
decline in school performance, 
the parent enrolled Student in a tutorial program with an 
out-of-district provider.  After eleven months of tutorial 
service, the Student&#8482;s grades 
improved.  Student was evaluated seven mont
hs after he discontinued the tutorial program. The parent claims the school district
 should be responsible for the cost of the out-of-district tutor.   
 
    