November 14, 2008 
 Final Decision and Order 07-352 
- 1 -  STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   
Appearing on behalf of the Parents:    
pro se  
Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education:  Attorney Rachel Kuschel 
       Durant Nichols & Houston 

       1057 Broad ST.  

       Bridgeport, CT 06604 

 
Appearing before:  Attorney Deborah R. Kearns Hearing Officer  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 
 
ISSUES:  Whether the parent is
 entitled to reimbursement for 
the cost of out-of-district tutorial services parent
 provided for the Student?  
PROCEDURAL HISTORY: PROCEDURAL HIST
ORY: The parent made a claim for 
Due Process seeking reimbursement for sums sp
ent on private tutorial services with an 
out-of-district provider.  The matter was c
onsolidated with Case
 No. 07-353, regarding Student&#8482;s sibling.  It was determined and ag
reed, the parties could adhere to a format 
which provides for a separate hearing, record, and decision for the individual students.  The parties agreed to extend the date fo
r mailing the final decision to accommodate 
scheduled hearing dates and briefs. The followi
ng witnesses testified at the hearing:  
Peter Bartoli, Kathy Baird, Brenda Schideler, Maureen Sullivan, 
Barbara Denver and the parent.  The date for mailing the fi
nal decision is November 15, 2008.   
 
SUMMARY:  The Student was identified as a 
child in need of sp
ecial education and related services from the second grade to the eighth grade.  He was exited from special 

education at the parent&#8482;s request on Oct
ober 25, 2007.  Student earned average grades, when he fully participated, in the school district&#8482;s special education program. In 

September 2006, Student&#8482;s parent excused hi
m from attending the resource room portion 
of his special education program. Seven months later, the parent enrolled Student in a 

tutorial program with an out-of-district prov
ider.  After eleven months of tutoring, the Student&#8482;s grades improved, but his standardized test scores for Reading declined.  The 

parent claims the school district should be responsible for the cost of the out-of-district 
tutor.   
 
 
 