April 30, 2008             Final Decision and Order 07-463 
- 1 - STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
  Student v. New Haven Board of Education 
 
Appearing on behalf of the Student:   Attorney Matthew Rubano 
142 Boston Post Road  

Madison, CT 06443 

 Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses 
       Berchem Moses & Devlin PC 

       75 Broad Street 

       Milford, CT 06460 

 
Appearing before:     Attorney Janis C. Jerman 
Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
  This special education hearing was requested via Request for Impartial Special Education 
Hearing dated April 1, 2008.  The request seeks review of a manifestation determination in the 
context of pending school discipline.  The deadline for mailing the final decision and order is 
June 4, 2008.  The matter was scheduled for a telephonic pr
e-hearing conference on April 18, 2008.  At that time, Student was represented by her Parent
 who indicated that the school was likely to drop the request for expulsion, making this matter moot. 
 Parent also indicated that he had retained counsel.  A pre-hearing conference was scheduled for Friday, April 25, 2008 with notice to counsel for both parties.  At the April 25 telephonic pre-hearing conference, Attorney Rubano appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney Michelle Laubin appeared on behalf of the Board of Education.  Both 
attorneys agreed that as of April 24, 2008, the Boar
d of Education notified 
Student in writing that it was not pursuing expulsion for the incident that was the basis of the manifestation 

determination that is the subject of this case.  
Attorney Rubano agreed that, in the absence of any 

pending discipline, there were no other facts or basis for review 
of the manifestation determination.  On those facts, 
Attorney Rubano agreed to withdraw the case or to have the hearing officer dismiss the case with prejudice for lack of jurisdiction. 

 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
  
     In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed with prejudice. 
  