May 13, 2008             Final Decision and Order 07-455 
- 1 -
 STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Student v. Bridgeport Board of Education 

 
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Surrogate Parent, 
pro se  
Appearing on behalf of the Bridgeport Board of Education: Atty. Susan C. Freedman, 
Shipman & Goodwin LLP, One Constitu
tion Plaza, Hartford, CT  06103-1919 
 
Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 
ISSUES 
 
 1. Did the Board offer a free appropria
te public education (FAPE) to the 
Student at the Planning and Placement Team meeting on Ma
rch 12, 2008 as required by 20 U.S.C. Section 1401 et seq. and Conn. Gen. Stats., Section 10-76d? 
 
 2. Should the Board provide the Studen
t with an IEP that places him in a 
therapeutic day program? 

 PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
 The Surrogate Parent requested this hearing by mailing a letter and request for a 
due process hearing to the Board's Director
 of Planning and Placement and a copy to the 
State Department of Education ("SDE"). Th
e Board and the SDE received the letter and request on March 19.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on March 20.  On 
March 26, the Surrogate Parent wrote to the Hearing Officer that she had a "two-week 
temporary agreement" with the Board and th
at she would notify the Hearing Officer if she wanted to reconvene the hearing.  A prehearing conference was held on March 28, 2008 with the Surrogate Parent and the Board's 
attorney.  A hearing date was agreed on for May 12.  The mailing date for the fi
nal decision was set at June 2, 2008.  The Surrogate Parent and Board's attorney were
 advised that if the parties reached a 
settlement, the Surrogate Parent should send
 a letter to the Heari
ng Officer requesting a withdrawal and the case would be dismissed. 
 
On April 30, the Surrogate Parent sent the Hearing Officer a withdrawal of the 
hearing request.  On May 1, the Hearing Officer advised the parties that the May 12 

hearing was canceled and that 
the case would be dismissed. 
  