September 5, 2008 
 Final Decision and Order 07-580 
- 1 -
  STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   
Student v. Southington Board of Education 

 
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Mother, pro se  
Appearing on behalf of the Southington Board of Education: Atty. Craig S. Meuser, Chinni & Meuser LLC, 30 Avon Meadow Lane, Avon, CT  06001 
 
Appearing before: Attorney Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 ISSUES:   1. Did the Board propose a free appropri
ate public education (FAPE) to the 
Student for the 2008-2009 school year?  

 
 2. If not, should the Board be required to place the Student in a residential 

placement at Lighthouse Voca
tional Education Center? 
 PROCEDURAL HISTORY:
  The Mother sent the Board a due process hearing request, which the Board received on June 26, 2008.  The Board faxed a copy of the request to the State Department of Education ("SDE") on that date
.  This Hearing Officer was assigned to the case on July 2.  A prehearing conference was held on July 25, 2008 with the Mother.  The 
Board&#8482;s Senior Coordinator of Special Education was not available to participate.  The 
Mother reported that the part
ies had an advisory hearing on July 17 and that the Board&#8482;s attorney would contact the Hearing Officer.  A hearing date was agreed on for August 28.  The mailing date for the final decision was 
set at September 9, 2008.  On July 25, Atty. 
Meuser notified the Hearing Officer that th
e parties had reached a settlement agreement 
at the advisory hearing that
 would preclude the due process case from going forward until 
agreed upon evaluations were completed.  Th
e Hearing Officer sent a hearing notice and a letter to the parties advising them of the procedures 
for requesting a postponement of a 
hearing and that, if the evaluation process woul
d take more than 30 days, the Parent could 
withdraw the hearing request without prejudice and refile it if necessary.   
 On August 26, the Parent faxed the Hearing 
Officer a letter stating that she had settled all pending disputes with the Board and wished to 
withdraw the hearing request   