March 31, 2009                                               - 1 -                                      Final Decision and Orde
r 09-0360 
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
  Student v. Hartford Board of Education     Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro se  Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Melinda Kaufmann 
 City of Hartford  Office of the Corporation Counsel 
 550 Main Street 

 Hartford, CT  06103  Appearing before:     Attorney Mary Elizab
eth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 ISSUE:  Whether the Board shall pay for testing of the Student who is currently not attending 
school.    SUMMARY:  This matter was assigned to th
e undersigned hearing officer. As there was no date on the 
request for hearing, the date of the request could not be ascertained. Furthermore, the Board&#8482;s 
attorney indicated that the Board did not receive this request until a copy was provided by the State 
Department of Education. 
  The Parent and Board were notified of a scheduled prehearing conference. At the first 
prehearing conference on March 23, 2009, the Board was present, but the Parent was not available. A second prehearing conference was noticed, and was convened on March 26, 2009. The Board&#8482;s attorney was present for this second prehearing 
conference, but the Parent was not present. The 
Parent submitted no notification re
garding the case or the scheduled prehearing conferences to the 
hearing officer.    Based on the foregoing, it is concluded that the Parent does not wish to proceed with a 
hearing at this time. While it is concerning th
at the Parent has indicated that the Student is currently not attending school and requires a tutor, the Parent was the moving party in this case. In 
the absence of any action or notification from the Parent, and no ava
ilability at either of the duly 
noticed prehearing conferences, this hearing cannot 
proceed. If the Parent wa
nts to proceed with a hearing in her daughter&#8482;s educational case, she retains the right to re-file 
a request for hearing, as this matter will be dismissed without prejudice. 
    FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:
  The matter is 
DISMISSED, without prejudice. 