May 21, 2009                                                                     - 1 -                                         
           Final Decision and Order 09-0445 
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Plainville Board of Education v. Student 
 
Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Nicole Bernabo 
Robinson & Cole LLP 
280 Trumbull Street 

Hartford, CT  06103-3597  Appearing on behalf of the Parent:  Attorney Piper Paul 
Law Office of Nora A. Belanger, L.L.C. 
10 Wall Street 

Norwalk, CT  06850  
Appearing before:     Attorney Mary
 Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer  
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
 ISSUES:  1. Whether Dr. Gladstone shall be permitted to consult with the Board regarding recommendations 
concerning the Student&#8482;s program, which consul
tation may include evaluations, observations, 
review of records and consultation with school, Board staff and the Parent. 
2. Whether the following assessments should be administ
ered to the Student to establish baseline for IEP goals and objectives and to monitor the St
udent&#8482;s educational progress: Woodcock Johnson 
writing subtest; TOWL; Woodcock Johnson Read
ing Achievement Test and the BASC? 
3. To the extent that such assessments as identifi
ed in issue 2 were already administered by the 
Chamberlain staff, whether the Board is entitled to
 review and consider this information prior to 
making recommendations? 
4. Whether the Board staff and Dr. Gladstone are permitted to observe the Student in various settings 

at Chamberlain as determined by the Board to be necessary for making educational 

recommendations? 
5. Whether the Board&#8482;s chosen psychiatrist and scho
ol psychologist Diane Valentine are permitted to 
speak to or to consult on a continual basis with, the Student&#8482;s treating psychiatrist at Chamberlain 
(currently Dr. Neder) regarding educational programming decisions as necessary. 
6. Whether the Board&#8482;s chosen psychiatrist is entitled to review the 
Student&#8482;s educational records in preparation for consulting with the Board. 
