                                                                                  
        
                June 1, 2010 1         Final Decision and 
Order 10-0371 
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Craig Meuser 
Chinni & Meuser 30 Avon Meadow Lane 
Avon, CT 06001 
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: No appearance filed.  While 
the Parent was sent notice of the prehearing conference and the hearing dates, the Parent was not pr
esent at the scheduled prehearing teleconference, did not appear at the hearing dates and submitted no filings in this matter. 
Appearing before:   
Attorney Mary
 Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
ISSUE: Whether the Board can provide a free and appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment in the Stud
ent&#8482;s neighborhood school. PROCEDURAL HISTORY: 
The Board filed this request for hearing [Exhibit H.O.-1] on April 12, 2010 and a prehearing conference convened on April 19, 2010. The Board&#8482;
s attorney participated in the prehearing conference, but the Parent did not participate, although the Parent was provided with appropriate notice of the prehearing conference. The hearing convened on two hearing dates, May 21, 2010 and May 28, 2010, both of which were duly noticed to both parties.  At the fi
rst hearing date, Board was present but 
the Parent did not appear.  Because 
the Parent did not appear, the hearing officer took appropriate additional steps to ensure that the Parent had 
notice of the hearing. Prior to 
commencing the hearing on May 21, 2010, the Board director and attorney were directed at the hearing by the hearing officer to contact the Parent at all phone numbers listed in the 
exhibits and other records to determine whether she 
was attending the hearing. The Board director and attorney left the hearing room, and upon their return re
ported that the Parent was not available at any of the phone numbers.  The hearing then proceeded with testimony on the first hearing date. 
The hearing was continued to May 28, 2010 for additional testimony, and the 
Board director indicated that she would contact the Parent prior to
 the hearing date to notify the Parent about the hearing, which was in addition to the Notice of Hearing forwarde
d to the Parent by the hearing officer. At the hearing on May 28, 2010 the Board director reported that she had spoken with the Parent that morning and the Parent stated that she would not 
contest the Board&#8482;s proposed placement.  The Board 
director further reported that she had requested that the Parent appear at the hearing to report this on the record. When the Parent did not appear at the heari
ng, the Board director called the Parent a second time, 
