                                                                                        
                
                  June 4, 2010 1 Final Decision and Order 10-0321 STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Student v. Windham Board of Education 
and Integrated Day Charter School 
Appearing on behalf of the Parent:    Attorney David C. Shaw 
The Law Office of David C. Shaw, LLC 34 Jerome Avenue, Suite 210 

Bloomfield, CT  06002 
Appearing on behalf of the Board and the Charter School:  
Attorney Peter J. Murphy 
Shipman & Goodwin LLP 

One Constitution Plaza 
Hartford, CT 06103-1919 
Appearing before:   
Attorney Mary
 Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
ISSUES: 1.Whether the Student&#8482;s IEP for the 2009-10 school year is inappropriate and violated 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1412(a)(5)(A) 2.Whether the Board and/or Charter School failed to provide an appropriate program in that the 
Student was offered placement in kindergarten 
for four hours, while nondisabled students were provided a full day program. 
3.Whether the Board and/or Charter School failed to provide appropriate supplemental aids and 
services and modifications to the general educati
on curriculum necessary to 
facilitate the student&#8482;s 
success in the program. 
4.Whether the Board and/or Charter School shall be required to hire an independent educational consultant acceptable to the Parents to help th
e PPT develop and implement a full day appropriate 
IEP in regular classes. 
5.Whether the Student shall be provided a full day 
kindergarten program with necessary aids and 
services. 6.Whether the Board and/or Charter School shall be required to retain an independent consultant to attend all planning meetings, make
 observations of the Student as needed, review
 all documents 
and data related to the program as needed, c
onsult with the Parents and school personnel as needed, train the school staff as needed and ma
ke written recommendations to the PPT at least 
quarterly. 7.Whether the Board and/or Charter School shall implement the recommendations of the consultant. 
8.Whether the Board and/or Charter School shall provide an appropriate program of compensatory 
education. 9.Whether the Board and/or Charter School shall implement a research based multisensory structure 
language approach to literacy appropriat
e for children with cognitive disabilities. 
