January 19, 2010  
1       Final Deci
sion and Order 10-0213 
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Student v. Derby Board of Education Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Melanie Dunn 
Law Offices of Siegel, O'C
onnor, O' Donnell & Beck, P.C. 
150 Trumbull Street 
Hartford, CT 06103 Appearing before:    Attorney 
Janis C. Jerman, Hearing Officer 
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by the Student via 
Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing. It was received by the Board of Education on November 
9, 2009. Therefore, the 30-day resolution period ran 
through December 9, 2009 and the deadline for 
mailing the final decision 
and order is January 23, 2010. A pre-hearing conference was held on December 
17, 2009. Attorney Dunn appeared on behalf of 
the Board of Education. No one appeared on behalf of the Student. At the pre-hearing conference, Attorney Dunn represented that the parties engaged in a resolution meeting, th
at the parties came to an agreement, 
and that paragraph three of the agreement indicates 
that the Student agrees not to pursue a due process 
request during the current school year. The case had not been withdrawn by the Student. In a Memorandum to the Parties & Order, the 
Hearing Officer indicated that if a request for hearing is to be withdrawn, the party who requested the hearing must submit the request
 for withdrawal in writing. Given the representation of the Board of Education&#8482;s attorney and the absence 
of the Parent or other Student representative on the pre-hearing conference ca
ll, the Hearing Officer believed that the case has 
been settled and that it was the St
udent&#8482;s intention to not proceed with a hearing. The Student was given until December 28, 2009 to indicate, in writing, an inte
ntion to proceed with the due process hearing. The 
Student was informed that if he did not so indicate an
 intention to proceed by that date, the matter would be 
dismissed in light of the settlement agreement and fa
ilure to prosecute. The Stude
nt made no indication of 
an intention to proceed with the hearing. FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed for failure to prosecute. 
