October 26, 2009  
1      Final Decision and Order 
10-0070 
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Board of Education1 v. Student 
Appearing on behalf of the Board:  Attorney Michelle Laubin 
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 
75 Broad Street 
Milford, CT 06460 
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Pro se2 Appearing before:   
Attorney Mary
 Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
ISSUE: Whether the Board shall be permitted to complete 
an evaluation of the Student including a diagnostic 
placement at a therapeutic day school, psychiatric 
evaluation by Dr. Dorothy Stubbe, an occupational 
therapy evaluation and an assistive technology evaluation in the absence of parental consent. PROCEDURAL HISTORY: 
The Board submitted this request for hearing 
on August 13, 2009 and a prehearing conference was convened on September 1, 2009.  The Bo
ard&#8482;s request for extension of the mailing date was granted, and 
this matter convened on two hearing dates,
 September 24, 2009 and September 29, 2009.   
The Board&#8482;s witnesses were James Obst, Connecticut 
Junior Republic director of education; Daniel 
French, director of the emotional disabilities unit of Cooperative
 Educational Services and the Board Supervisor of Special Education. The Mother testified on behalf of the Student. 
The Board submitted a substantial number of exhibits &#338; more than 260 &#338; all of which were thoroughly 
reviewed and considered in this decision.  No exhibits were submitted by the Parents. 
1 The names of the Board and the Board Supervisor of Special Education are intentionally omitted from this decision by the 
hearing officer.  The facts set forth in this decision could lead to the identification of the Student involved in this case.  
This information is omitted to protect the Student&#8482;s privacy rights under the Federal Educational Rights and Privacy Act [FERPA]. 
2 The Parents are divorced.  The Mother pa
rticipated in the prehearing conference and 
appeared and testified at the hearing. 
The Father did not participate in the prehearing
 conference and did not appear at the hearing. 
