                             March 22, 2010 1 Final Decision and Order 10-0354 STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Student v. West Hartford Board of Education Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Ms. Amy Eisner 
New Beginnings, LLC 7 Hemlock Lane 

Coventry, CT 06238 
Appearing on behalf of the Board:   Attorney Susan Freedman 
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP 

One Constitution Plaza 
Hartford, CT 06103 
Appearing before: 
   Attorney Ma
ry Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
SUMMARY: The request for hearing was submitted by the Pare
nts&#8482; representative by request dated March 9, 
2010. The matter was scheduled for a prehearing
 conference on March 24, 2010, as requested by agreement of the parties.
 Despite the instruction to copy the opposi
ng party on any communication submitted to the 
hearing officer, the non-attorney advocate for the Pa
rents submitted three such communications to the 
hearing officer. These communications
 were then forwarded to the Board or Board&#8482;s attorney and the non-attorney advocate was reminded at each of these 
submissions that it is required that the opposing 
party receive a copy of any communications
 submitted to the hearing officer.   
The first submission by the non-attorney advocate,
 which was not copied to the Board, was a thank you email, in which the non-attorney advocate 
noted her thanks to the hearing officer &#64257;for granting me this opportunity 
to represent the family.&#64258; She further noted that:  &#64257;I am hoping that you have read what I sent
 you, and know that I am not an attorney.  
Thank you very very much [sic]. I know I can do 
this!  I truly appreciate through thought and consideration in this matter!  This made my
 day.  I have been preparing for 6 weeks!!&#64258; In response to this email, the hearing officer remi
nded the non-attorney advocate that this type of ex parte communication was not permitted, and that any co
mmunication to the hearing officer shall be 
forwarded to the opposing party. It was also noted in the hearing officer response to this email that by 

the scheduling of the prehearing conference, no decision had been made regarding the non-attorney 
