March 31, 2010 1      Final Decision and Order 10-0256 
STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Monroe Board of Education v. Student Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses 
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C. 
75 Broad Street 
Milford, CT 06460 
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro se Appearing before:  Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
ISSUE: Whether the Board&#8482;s evaluation and functional behavioral assessment (FBA) are appropriate. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION
: The Board filed this due process request pursuant to 34 C.F.R. &#167;300.502(b) to defend the appropriateness of its educational evaluation and FBA. [Exhibit H.O.-1] The Parents received this request for hearing on January 9, 2010, and a prehearing conference was convened on January 26, 2010. This matter c
onvened on two hearing dates, March 2, 2010 and March 26, 2010. 
At the first hearing date, the Mother, the Board school psychologist and the Board director of pupil personnel services testified.  In her testimony, the 
Mother stated that she had no disagreement regarding the educat
ional evaluation of the Student.  As there was no disagreement 
as to the educational evaluation, the Board&#8482;s attorney moved fo
r summary judgment as to the 
appropriateness of the educational evaluation. The motion was granted.  The Board&#8482;s attorney 
also moved for summary judgment on the issue of 
the appropriateness of the FBA, which motion 
was denied as the Parent continued to dispute the appropriateness of the FBA. Prior to the second hearing date, the Mother 
submitted notification that the Parents were 
withdrawing their request for an independent educational evaluation at public expense for the December 2009 functional behavioral assessment.  
[Exhibit H.O.-2] On the second hearing date, 
the sole issue of the appropriateness of the FBA remained.  The Mo
ther stated on the record that 
she was knowingly, voluntarily and willingly wi
thdrawing the Parents&#8482; request for an 
independent educational evaluation, including an FBA, with prejudice.   Based on this statement, and at the request of 
the Board, the case was dismissed as no further 
issues remained to be decided. 
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER: 
The matter is 
DISMISSED. 