June 29, 201i Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 11-0364/1 1—041 8

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl v, Regional School District 14

Appearing on behalfof Student: Attorney John Cvejanovich
O‘Connell, Flaherty & Attmore, LLC
280 Trumbull Street
Hartford, CT 06103-3509

Appearing on behalf of the Board ofEducation: Attorney Rebecca Rudnick Santiago
Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
w
1. Whether Student’s Mother’s failure to consent to a neuropsychological evaluation
based solely on the identity of the evaluator should be overridden.
2. Whether BOE failed to implement Student’s IEP by not selecting Dr. Lovecky to

perform the neuropsychological evaluation.

Procedural Histog:
A special education hearing was requested by the Board ol‘Education’s (“BOE’S”)

Attorney Via letter dated March 21, 201 1.2 BOE’s Request was assigned case number l 1—0364
and assigned to the undersigned Hearing Officer. It was received by Student’s Attorney on
March 23. The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was May 7.

On March 25, Student’s Attorney ﬁled a letter that was treated as a motion to dismiss and

request for order Ofstay put.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S.C. § l232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student”,
“Parents", “School” and titles of school staff members and certain other witnesses in place of names and other
personally identiﬁable infonnation, The school district is identiﬁed by name, as are district-wide staff whose identity
will not reveal the paiticular school, program, or student.

2 All dates are 201 1 unless othenvise indicated.

June 29, 2011 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1—0364/1 1—0418

A pre—hearing conference was held on March 29. Attorney Cvejanovich appeared on
behalf of Student3 and Attorney Santiago appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issue was
identiﬁed: Should BOE be permitted to conduct a neuropsychological evaluation ot‘Student over
Student’s Parent’s objection?

During the pre-hearing conference, the parties agreed to entry of the following stay put
order which was deemed an Order of the Hearing Ofﬁcer: “Absent consent of Student’s Parent,
BOE shall conduct no testing of Student and shall make no change in Student’s special education
status until a Hearing Ofﬁcer has rendered a decision in this case. BOE shall maintain Student’s
current level of sewices during the pendency of this case.”

Hearings were scheduled for April 27 and 29.

On April 4, BOE’S Attorney ﬁled a timely objection to the motion to dismiss. On April 5,
Student’s Attorney ﬁled a reply to BOE’s objection. On April 7, the motion to dismiss was
denied on the basis that the ﬁndings that Student’s Attorney asks the Hearing Ofﬁcer to make in
deciding the motion to dismiss are the ultimate questions that the Hearing Ofﬁcer must decide
after an evidentiary hearing and can not decide through a motion to dismiss.

The motion to dismiss included a statement of fact that raised a question as to whether the
issue was properly flamed. A status conference was scheduled for April 14 to discuss whether
the issue was properly framed or whether it should be re-framed to be “Whether the
neuropsychological evaluation must be performed by Dr. Lovecky.”

Via letter dated April 13, BOE’S Attorney proposed that the issue be i‘e-ﬂ‘amed to be
“Whether the District is entitled to conduct a neuropsychological evaluation by a Connecticut
licensed neuropsychologist of its own choosing?”

On April 14, a pre—hearing status conference was convened to discuss whether the issue
was properly framed or whether it should be re-framed. The paﬂies presented their positions on
the issues Following the status conference, via letter dated April 14, Student’s Attorney proposed
the following re-framed issues: Should BOB be permitted to propose an evaluator, recommended
and agreed upon by the PPT, as the only evaluator, then, on its sole initiative, and without any

factual basis, change that evaluator without the consent of Student’s Parents or the PPT?; and

3 Student’s Attomey appeared on behalt‘of Student and Student‘s Mother, During the pre-hearing conference, the
parties‘ allomeys indicated that they were unaware ot‘whether Student’s Father wished to panicipate in the case.
Student‘s Father was given notice 0fthe proceedings and an opponunity to participate. Student‘s Father did not
respond or palticipale in any way,

 

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/1 1-0418

Should BOE be permitted to limit testing to only a narrow range of Student’s psychological
issues?

By order of the Hearing Ofﬁcer, the issue was re-framed as: Whether BOE is entitled to
conduct a neuropsychological evaluation by an evaluator of its own choosing, over Student’s
Mother’s objection?

Via letter dated April 18, BOE’s Attorney requested a 30-day extension of the mailing
date to permit the parties to ﬁle briefs on the question of whether the 1‘e-framed issue should be
decided as a matter of law. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request for an
extension was granted. The deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended to June 6
and the April 27 and 29 hearings were cancelled.

Via letter dated April 26, Student’s Attorney ﬁled a request for an impartial due process
hearing (Student’s Request was assigned case number 1 1—0418 and was assigned to Hearing
Ofﬁcer Gelﬁnan). On April 27, BOE’s Attorney ﬁled a motion to strike and dismiss Case 11-
0418. On that same date, Student’s Attorney ﬁled an objection to the motions. On April 28,
BOE’s Attorney ﬁled a motion to consolidate the two cases.

Pursuant to Section 10-76h—8(f)(3) 0f the Connecticut State Agency Regulations, the two
Hearing Ofﬁcers consulted and agreed that the cases should be consolidated with the
undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer. The two cases were consolidated with the undersigned Hearing
Ofﬁcer on May 2‘

A pre—hearing status conference was held on May S, Attorney Cvejanovich appeared on
behalf of Student and Attorney Santiago appeared on behalf of BOE. During the pre-hearing
status conference, the case timelines were consolidated according to the timelines 0f the later
ﬁled case. By order of the Hearing Ofﬁcer, the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order in
the consolidated cases is July 10.

On May 15, the Hearing Ofﬁcer ruled that, as a matter of law, a board of education has a
right to conduct its own evaluation utilizing the professional(s) of its own choosing prior to a
parent obtaining a second opinion through an independent educational evaluation. Since
Student’s Mother refused consent for evaluation based on the identity of the evaluator, BOB has
the burden ot‘proving, at a hearing, that this refusal of consent should be overridden. The hearing

in Case 1 1—0364 was limited to the very narrow issue of whether Student’s Mother’s failure to

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1—0364/1 1-0418

consent to a neuropsychological evaluation based solely on the identity of the evaluator should
be overridden.

BOE’s motion to strike and dismiss Case I 1-0418 was denied. The hearing in Case Il-
0418 was limited to the narrow question of whether BOE failed to implement Student’s IEP by
not selecting Dr. Lovecky to perform the neuropsychological evaluation.

Hearing was held on J une l. The palties submitted simultaneous post-hearing briefs and

proposed ﬁndings of fact on June 9.

Findings of Relevant Fact: 4
1. Student is a ﬁﬁeen year old student (Stip FOF 1).5 Student is a twice—exceptional student 7

gifted and disabled (Testimony of Struckus; Student’s Mother).

2. Student is eligible to receive special education and related services from the Regional School
District N0. 14 (“BOB”) under the eligibility category ol‘autism (Stip FOF 4).

3. Dr. Joseph “Jed” Struckus, a neuropsychologist, has provided psychological services to
Student since 2004. At that time, Student had no diagnosis and was attending a Montessori
school where he was struggling. Student’s attitude about school was worsening and he would
not attend school (Testimony of Struckus; Quirk).

4. Struckus worked with Dr. Deirdre Lovecky to develop a program to get Student on an
educational track. Lovecky evaluated Student in her ofﬁce in Rhode Island and provided
recommendations that were used in Student’s educational program (Testimony of Struckus).

5. In approximately 2007-08, Student returned to a classroom setting. He attended a small,
ﬂexible learning environment (Testimony of Struckus).

6. Student has not had any standardized assessments conducted in the last three years (Stip FOF
19). The last time Student was evaluated was when he received a Speech, Language and
Relatedness Evaluation that began in December, 2007 and concluded in February, 2008 (Stip
FOF 20).

7‘ Student was last evaluated by Lovecky in 2005. He has not seen her since that time
(Testimony of Student’s Mother). Lovecky has not had a continuing relationship with
Student or with Struckus (Testimony of Struckus; Student’s Mother).

4 Findings ot‘Fact are cited as “FOP“ in the discussion section.
5 Per Order of the Hearing Ofﬁcer, the parties ﬁled a Joint Stipulation ct" Uncontested Facts on May 27. It is cited as

“Slip FOF,"

June 29, 2011 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/11—0418

8.

101

ll.

12.

13.

Christopher Quirk is currently the Director of the Easton Countty Day School High School
program. Quirk was BOE’s Director of Special Sewices from June 2006 to June 2010
(Testimony of Quirk).

A Planning and Placement Team (“PPT”) meeting was held on April 19, 2010 (Stip FOF 7).
The April 19, 2010 PPT meeting was Student’s Annual Review (Stip FOF 8)

Quirk attended Student’s April 2010 PPT meeting (Exh. B-l ). At that time, the PPT
determined that no additional evaluation was needed. The PPT did not make a
recommendation as to the type of evaluation that might be needed in the future. The PPT
envisioned a future need for testing and wrote Lovecky’s name into the summaiy of the
individualized education program (“IEP”) as being the person to whom they would put the
question as to what type ot‘testing was needed given the data provided (Testimony ol‘Quirk).
The April 19, 2010 IEP contains the following language in the “List of PPT
Recommendations” section: PPT recommended that no additional evaluation needed at this
time. Recommendation to review need for testing at each annual PPT meeting.
Recommendation for Dr. LaVecchi [sic] to do testing when PPT determines necessary. 1 .
Future programming recommendations will be developed [sic] by a mutually agreed upon
independent consultant if there is disagreement among the administrative team, or between
the administrative team and Region 14; consultant will be chosen from one of the following
disciplines — Education (CT Ceniﬁed educational professional) or Neuropsychology (Stip
FOF 9).

It was Quirk’s intention that Lovecky would direct the evaluations that would take place.
Quirk recognized that there are some limitations to the types of evaluations Lovecky could
perform but anticipated that she would perform some evaluations. Quirk would follow her
guidance if additional testing was recommended. The PPT was concerned about unknown
people performing evaluations and proposed that Lovecky would handle the transition
(Testimony of Quirk). Quirk testiﬁed that Student should be introduced to new situations
utilizing people outside of his family that he trusts. Quirk testiﬁed that Struckus could ﬁll
that role.

A PPT meeting was held on July 20, 2010 (Stip FOF 10). By that time, Quirk had left BOE’S
employ (Testimony of Quirk). Domia Marcinek, BOE’s Interim Director of Special Services,

attended the PPT meeting (Exh. B—2).

June 29, 2011 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/1 1—041 8

14.

15‘

16.

18.

19‘

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

The July 20, 2010 IEP contains the following language in the “List ofPPT
Recommendations” section: PPT recommended that no additional evaluation needed at this
time. Recommendation to review need for testing at each annual PPT meeting.
Recommendation for Lovecky to do testing when PPT determines necessaiy (Stip FOF 11).
Student’s Mother provided a written addendum to both the Apri1 19, 2010 and J uly 20, 2010
IEPs. The written addenda are attached to the respective IEPs (Stip FOF 12).

Student currently receives counseling services, which are provided by Struckus, as part of his
IEP (Stip FOF 6). Struckus has attended all ot‘Student’s PPT meetings (Testimony of
Stmckus).

. Student has historically had a difﬁcult time transitioning to new environments and is

sensitive to what he perceives are invasions of his privacy (Testimony of Struckus; Student’s
Mother; Quirk).

Student currently attends the Marvelwood School, in Kent, CT, where he is a boarding
student in the ninth grade (Stip FOF 5). Student transitioned to Marvelwood during summer
2010 with the assistance of Struckus. All of the faculty at Mal'velwood were new to Student
when he began his transition to the school (Testimony of Struckus).

Student transitioned well to Mawelwood and has done well academicany (Testimony of
Struckus).

Student’s interactions with school staff and fellow students are more appropriate; his anxiety
and dysthymia are under more control; and he is better able to reﬂect on and verbalize his
feelings in different situations (Testimony of Stl'uckus; Quirk).

Student’s improvement since 2005 is marked (Testimony of Stmckus; Quirk).

A PPT meeting was held on February 15 (Stip FOF 13). Kimberly Culkin, BOE’s current
Director of Special Services, was present at the PPT meeting (Testimony ofCulkin).

The February 15 PPT meeting was Student’s Annual Review (Stip FOF 14). At the PPT
meeting, a comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation was recommended by BOB to
determine Student’s current level of adaptive skills functioning, behavioral and emotional
functioning, cognitive skills and reading/writing skills (Stip FOF 15).

Culkin initially recommended that the evaluation be performed by BOE’s School
Psychologist. Student’s Mother did not consent to the evaluation being performed by BOE’s

School Psychologist (Testimony of Culkin).

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: C0nso1idated Cases 11—0364/1 1—0418

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

Student’s Mother asked that Lovecky perform the evaluation (Testimony of Student’s
Mother). Student’s Mother indicated that Lovecky was familiar with Student, had evaluated
him in the past, and was named in the 2010 IEPs.

The PPT considered and denied the request because they believe that Lovecky is not properly
credentialed (Testimony of Culkin).

Culkin provided Student’s Parents with the names of three neuropsychologists in an effort to
come to an agreement as to the evaluator (Testimony of Culkin; Exh. B—4). Student’s Mother
did not consent to any 0fthe three proposed evaluators (Testimony of Student’s Mother).
Culkin subsequently offered Student’s Parents three options: a) have school staff conduct the
evaluation; b) select a mutually agreed upon neuropsychologist to conduct the evaluation; 01'
e) have Lovecky conduct an element of the evaluation and the mutually agreed upon
neuropsychologist conduct the other pcltions of the evaluation (Exh. B-5).

Student’s Parents do not object to a neuropsychological evaluation being conducted as part of
a comprehensive evaluation of Student’s cognitive, behavioral, emotional, and
communication functioning (Stip FOF 16).

Student’s Parents have not signed consent for a neuropsycho1ogical evaluation (Stip FOF
17).

One or both of Student’s Parents attended the April 29, 2010; July 20, 2010; and February
15, 201 1 PPT meetings (Stip FOF 18). Student’s Parents received a copy of their procedural
safeguards prior to each PPT meeting (Stip FOF 23).

Student’s last triennial evaluation, in January, 2010, was a records review (Stip FOF 21).
Lovecky does not hold a Connecticut Department of Public Health license as a psychologist
(Stip FOF 22). Lovecky is a clinical psychologist licensed in Rhode Island and
Massachusetts (Exh. P-14). Lovecky is not a neuropsycho10gist (Testimony ofCulkin).
Culkin is a certiﬁed school psychologist and is trained in evaluating students with special
needs. In her experience as a school psychologist, Culkin has evaluated students and
conducted assessments. As a member of the PPT, she makes recommendations regarding
evaluations (Testimony of Cu1kin; Exh. B—7). Culkin’s role in the PPT is to ensure
compliance with the IDEA and to ensure that BOE meets its obligations to students

(Testimony ofCulkin).

 

June 29, 2011 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 11—0364/1 1-0418

Conclusions of Law:

1.

Student is eligible for special education and related services as set fonh in the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”), 20 U.S.C. Sec. 140] , et seq,

The Hearing Ofﬁcer has the authority (A) to conﬁrm, modify, or reject the identiﬁcation,
evaluation 01' educational placement of or the provision of a free appropriate public education
to the child 01' pupil, (B) to determine the appropriateness of an educational placement where
the parent or guardian of a child requiring special education has placed the child or pupil in a
program other than that prescribed by the PPT, 01‘ (C) to prescribe alternate special
educational programs for the child. Where a parent has refused consent for reevaluation, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer may order a reevaluation without the consent of the parent. Connecticut
General Statutes § 10-76h(d)(1).

A student’s IEP must be reviewed not less than annually and revised as appropriate. 34 CFR
§300.324(b).

A school district must conduct a reevaluation of each child with a disability at least once
every three years, unless the parent and school district agree that reevaluation is not
necessary. 34 CFR § 300.303(b)(2).

Parental consent is required for reevaluations. 34 CFR § 300.300(c)(1)(i). If a parent refuses
consent for reevaluation, the school district may request a hearing to seek an order of the
Hearing Ofﬁcer overriding the lack of parental consent. 34 CFR § 300.300(c)(1)(ii);
Connecticut General Statutes § 10—76h(d)(1).

A school district has a right to conduct its own evaluation utilizing the p1‘0fessional(s) of its
own choosing prior to a parent obtaining a second opinion through an independent
educational evaluation.

A school district has the burden of proving that lack of parental consent for evaluation should
be overridden.

The criteria for an independent educational evaluation (“IEE”) must be the same as that used

by the school district in an evaluation. 34 CFR 300.502(e)(1).

Discussion:

Issue 1: Whether Student’s Mother’s failure to consent to a neuropsychological evaluation
based solely on the identity of the evaluator should be overridden.

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 11-0364/1 1—0418

A school district must conduct a reevaluation of each child with a disability at least once
every three years, unless the parent and school district agree that reevaluation is not necessary. A
school district has a right to conduct its own evaluation utilizing the professional(s) of its own
choosing prior to a parent obtaining a second opinion through an independent educational
evaluation.

Parental consent is required for reevaluationsi If a parent refuses consent for reevaluation,
the school district may request a hearing to seek an order of the Hearing Ofﬁcer overriding the
lack ofparental consent

The parties have stipulated that Student’s Parents do not object to a neuropsychological
evaluation being conducted as part of a comprehensive evaluation of Student’s cognitive,
behavioral, emotional, and communication functioning (Stip FOF 16); that Student has not had
any standardized assessments conducted in the last three years (Stip FOF l9); and that the last
time Student was evaluated was when he received a Speech, Language and Relatedness
Evaluation in 2007-08 (Stip FOF 20).

Student’s Mother argues that the April 2010 and July 2010 lEPs obligate BOE to use
Lovecky for the evaluation and that failure to use Lovecky will result in invalid results due to
Student’s historically difﬁcult time transitioning to new environments and his sensitivity to what
he perceives as invasions of his privacy.

Witnesses on behalf of Student testiﬁed that they believe that Lovecky is the best
candidate to get the most valid and useful results; that introducing a new person to Student will
have a negative effect on him that would cause him to under-I‘epresent his capacity and affect his
education; that Student knows and feels safe with Lovecky; and that using Lovecky will have no
risk ot‘adverse effect.

Utilization of Lovecky was described as a “risk minimization strategy.” Quirk testiﬁed
that the validity of the evaluation results could affect the appropriateness of Student’s IEP and
that the goal is to get the best possible performance from Student.

BOB argues that it has the right to conduct the neuropsychological evaluation with the
evaluator of its own choosing and that Student’s Parents can pursue an IEE if they disagree with
BOE’S evaluation,

On behalfof BOE, neuropsychologist Kristi Sacco testiﬁed that there are ways to

acclimate a child to an unknown evaluator and ways to avoid invalid results. F 01' example, the

 

June 29, 20] 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/1 1-0418

evaluator might observe a child in class before meeting him; the evaluator could discuss a child
with parents and school ofﬁcials to understand their concerns; an evaluator could place the child
in a comfortable setting and conduct several sessions to help the child acclimate.

Sacco further testiﬁed that it is not problematic to evaluate an unknown student; that the
stress of meeting a new person is possible in any case; and that an evaluation by an unknown
person is not likely to damage a child.

Testimony regarding the possibility of invalid results caused by an unknown person
evaluating Student is speculative. Uncontroverted testimony indicates that Student has not seen
Lovecky in six years; that he recently transitioned successfully to a new school; that he was able
to develop relationships with and be taught by faculty that were new to him; that Student’s
interactions with school staff and fellow students are more appropriate, his anxiety and
dysthymia are under more control, and he is better able to reflect on and verbalize his feelings in
different situations; and that Student’s improvement since 2005 (when he was last evaluated by
Lovecky) is marked

There is no evidence that Lovecky and her ofﬁce environment (which were described as
being comfoﬂable to Student) are the same as they were in 2005 or that they will be consistent
with Student’s memory of them.

Quirk credibly testiﬁed that, in April 2010, it was his intention that Lovecky would direct
the evaluations that would take place; that there were limitations to the types of evaluations
Lovecky could perform; that Lovecky would handle the transition for other necessary
evaluations which she could not perform; and that Student should be introduced to new situations
utilizing people outside of his family that he mists, such as Struckus.

This issue is very narrow — whether Student’s Mother’s failure to consent to a
neuropsychological evaluation based solely on the identity ofthe evaluator should be overridden.
The issue is not whether Student’s Mother’s proposed evaluator is appropriate or a better choice,
but whether failure to consent should be overridden, taking into consideration BOE’s right to
select the evaluator and Student’s Mother’s right to withhold consent,

Student’s Mother’s lack of consent based on the identity of the evaluator is dependent on
speculation as to the validity of the results. BOE has a right to conduct its own evaluation
utilizing the professional of its own choosing If Student’s Parents disagree with the evaluation

or believe that it is not valid, they can seek an IEE.

10

 

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/1 1—0418

BOE has met its burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that lack of
parental consent should be overridden to permit BOE to conduct a neuropsychological evaluation
utilizing the professiona1(s) of its own choosing in order to gather current data about Student’s

functioning and educational needs.

Issue 2: Whether BOE failed to implement Student’s IEP by not selecting Dr. Lovecky to
perform the neuropsychological evaluation.

Student’s Mother argues that BOE failed to implement Student’s IEP by not selecting
Lovecky to perform the neuropsychological evaluation Student’s Mother Claims that the PPT
did not agree to change the April 2010 and July 2010 IEPs identifying Lovecky.

The 2010 lEPs were not conclusive as to whether Lovecky would perform all evaluations
and were written prior to Student’s successful transition to Marvelwood when the PPT was
concerned about his transition capability.6

Quirk testiﬁed that it was his intention that Lovecky would direct the evaluations that
would take place and that selection of appropriate evaluators would be controlled by their
credentials. The IEPs were not conclusive that Lovecky would perform a neuropsychological
evaluation as her ability to do so was conditioned on her credentials. In 201 1, at the time that
BOE and Student’s Mother agreed that a neuropsychological evaluation was appropriate, B013
determined that Lovecky’s credentials did not render her to be an appropriate evaluator since she
was not licensed in Connecticut and is not a neuropsychologist.

A student’s IEP must be reviewed not less than annually and be revised as appropriate.
The April 2010 and July 2010 IEPs do not bind BOE indeﬁnitely. Student’s IEP was reviewed
and revised at a PPT meeting in Febmai'y 201 l. BOE determined that there was a need for a
neuropsychological evaluation and sought to exercise its right to conduct an evaluation utilizing
the professional of its own choosing.

BOE is responsible for developing the IEP and ensuring that it provides Student with a
free, appropriate public education (“FAPE”). The members of the PPT, including parents,
participate in that process. Right to participation does not give parents veto power over the

ultimate decision lEPs are not created by way of majority vote. Where there is a lack of

6 The PPT determined that an evaluation was not necessary in 2010 because they thought it was too much for
Student to go through while he was transitioning to Marvelwood (Testimony onuirk; Struckus).

11

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/1 1-0418

agreement as to the contents of an IEP, a school district has an obligation to develop an IEP that
provides FAPE.

Student’s Mother cites the silence of members of the PPT as evidence that they did not
agree to change the IEP with regard to the identity of the evaluator. As representatives of the
school district, the silence of school staff could equally be seen as acquiescence with Culkin’s
recommendation to have the neuropsychological evaluation performed by a Connecticut licensed
professional (Lovecky is not licensed in Connecticut)

The IEP was revised in February 201 1 and did not require selection of Lovecky as
evaluator.

BOE met its burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that it did not fail to

implement Student’s IEP when it refused to select Lovecky as evaluator in 201 1.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

1. The Board of Education may conduct a neuropsychological evaluation of Student. The
lack of parental consent to the evaluation is hereby overridden.

2. The neuropsychological evaluation shall be conducted by an evaluator 0f the Board of
Education’s choosing under the condition that said evaluator must be properly credentialed
consistent with the criteria set forth in the Board of Education’s Independent Educational
Evaluation Criteria (Exhibit 3-12).

3. The Board of Education shall, at public expense, consult with Dr. Jed Struckus concerning
Student’s needs and suggestions for ensuring the test experience leads to a positive result
and shall, at public expense, utilize Dr. Struckus to introduce Student to the evaluator and
the evaluation process.

4. The Board of Education did not fail to implement Student’s IEP by not selecting Dr.

Lovecky to perform the neuropsychological evaluation. Case 1 1—0418 is dismissed.

12

June 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order: Consolidated Cases 1 1-0364/1 1-0418

Attachment A 7 Exhibits

Hearing Ofﬁcer exhibits are identiﬁed as “HO—#; BOE’s exhibits are identiﬁed as “B-#”; and
Student’s Parent’s exhibits are identiﬁed as “P-#”. The following exhibits were admitted into
evidence as full exhibits.

HO-l: March 21, 20] 1 request for hearing ﬁled by the BOE in case 11-0364
110-2: April 26, 201 1 request for hearing ﬁled by Student in case 1 1—0418
HO-3: Joint Stipulation 0f Uncontested Facts dated May 27, 2011

P-3: Lovecky Psychological Evaluation September 14—15, 2005

P—4: Thurman Consultation Report

P-5: Thurman Consultation Report

P-9: Corrections to Februaly 15, 2011 IEP

P-l 0: E—mails between Student’s Mother and Cu1kin

P-l 1: E-mail from Culkin to Student’s Mother March 16, 201 1

P-12: E-mail from Student’s Mother to Lovecky April 7, 201 1

P—14: Letter from Lovecky April 14, 201 1

P~16z Student’s Parent’s letter April 25, 2011

13-1 2 PPT Meeting Minutes/IEP April 19, 2010

B-2: PPT Meeting Minutes/IEP July 20, 2010

B—3: PPT Meeting Minutes/IEP February 15, 201 1

8—4: Letter from BOE Attomey to Student’s Attorney March 1, 201 1

B—5: Letter from Cu1kin to Student’s Parents March 17, 20] 1

B-6: E-mail between Culkin and Student’s Parents March 201 1

B—7: Cu1kin Resume

B—8: Marcinek Resume

B—9: Hay Resume

B-10: Sacco Resume

B-1 1: Policy Statement from Houston Conference on Specialty Education and Training in
Clinical Neuropsychology

B—12: Independent Educational Evaluation Criteria

13

 

