July 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0451

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Farmington Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on Behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on Behalf 01'1he Board: Attorney Julie Fay
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado,
Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUE:

Should the board be entitled to conduct comprehensive evaluations of the Student as
recommended by the PPT without the Parent’s consent?

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
SUMMARY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public
education (“FAPE”) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-
76a. At a PPT meeting, the Board requested consent to conduct comprehensive
evaluations to determine if the Student should be identiﬁed as a student entitled to receive
special education and related services. The Parent denied the Board’s request for consent
and the Board ﬁled for due process.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(CGS) §10—76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act, CGS
§§4—1766t0 4—178, inclusive, and 4-181a and 4-186.

A hearing was requested by the Board on May 16, 201 I. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was
appointed on May 16, 201 1 and a pre—hearing conference was held on May 23, 201 1. A
hearing date ol‘June 15, 201 1 was chosen.

 

July 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0451

The Parent did not attend the due process hearing; attempts to contact the Parent were not
successful After the hea1'1ng was concluded, the Parent telephoned the Boald’ s attomey
at approximately 3: 40 pm onI June 15, 201 l,conﬁ1ming that she had received a telephone
call about the hea11ng. (H. O. -4). The Pa1ent did not call the healing of ce1 o1 send any
type of couespondence giving a 1eason why she did attend the hea1ing o1 request to
reopen the hearing 01' for the Parent to request to reopen the hearing to present testimony.
At the request of the Board, in order to accommodate the ﬁling of a ﬁnal order and
decision after the hearing dates, the date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order
was extended. The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is July 30, 201 1.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, procedural
history, ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of
law set fotth herein, which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant
to exclude other suppoited evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in
deciding this matter. To the extent that the summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of
fact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered and vice versa.
SAS Institute Inc. v. S. & H. Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816 (M.D.Tenn. 1985)
and Bonnie Ann F.v. Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F.Supp. 340 (S,D.Tex.
1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student has not been found eligible to receive special education and related
services; he is currently receiving support and accommodations through a 504
Plan due to hearing loss. (Testimony of Classroom Teacher)

2. The Student was ﬁrst referred to a PPT 011 5/ 19/2005 because he had been
physical toward his teachers and had some tantmms. The Student also tended to
bolt when he became agitated. (Board Exhibit2 3)

3. The PPT considered his eligibility for special education and related services Two
PPTs were convened: one to request evaluations and the follow up PPT to review
the evaluations. The Student was not found eligible for special education but a
504 Plan was developed. (B—6, B-9)

4. In November 2006 an emergency PPT meeting was convened because of the
Student’s disruptive behavior. The team recommended evaluations including a
psychiatric evaluation. The Parent was not present but gave the team permission
to convene. The Parent did not give permission for the team to conduct the
evaluations. The special education teacher collected data as to the Student’s
behaviors and to identify a behavior management plan best suited for the Student.
(B—24, B-27, B-28)

Hem 111g Ofﬁcer exhibits will be noted by “H. O. " followed by the exhibit numbel
Z'He1einaﬁer Board Exhibits will be referred to with “B” followed by the exhibit numbe1.

2

 

July 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—045]

10.

11.

12,

The Parent consented to an educational evaluation of the Student to be conducted
by the special education teacher. This evaluation could only go foiwal'd if the
Parent was allowed to observe. The Parent was present in the room throughout the
evaluation. (B-30, B—31)

In May 2007 the Student engaged in various inappropriate behaviors with another
Student. The other student stated she felt uncomfortable with the Student’s
behavior, The Student’s behavior plan was reviewed and adjustments were made
to address the issue. (B—33)

In May 2008, the Student was once again referred to a PPT. The PPT met and the
Parent was not present. The board attempted to have the Parent participate but the
Parent would not palticipate in the PPT. The team recommended psychiatric,
psychological, academic, speech and language and occupational evaluations of
the Student. A follow up PPT was convened in June, the Parent was not present.
The team recommended closing the PPT process at this time due to the Parent’s
denial of consent to evaluate and her agreement to instill positive changes with
the Student. (B-4l, 8-42)

In December 2008, the Student was suspended for 2 days because he hit a staff
member. The Board continued to be concerned with the Student’s impulsivity,
poor judgment and lack of self-control. (B-48)

In the 5‘" grade, the Student continued to receive 504 accommodations for his
unilateral hearing loss. The Parent requested that the Student’s social work
sewices be discontinued. (Testimony of Director of Pupil Services)

In the 5‘h grade, the Student met end of year standards but his behavior detracted
from his learning and he needed to be reminded about what is appropriate. The
Student had two in-school suspensions for inappropriate language. (B-60)

In October 29, 2010, Dr. Paul Dworkin, through the Parent, sent a letter to the
Board with recommendations based upon an assessment he had made of the
Student. The Board asked the Patent for a copy of the assessment but the Parent
was not willing to provide a copy of the Consultation repoﬁ. The Board was given
permission to speak with the doctor. The doctor followed up the contact with a
letter to the Board stating that the Student’s behavior warranted a formal school—
based assessment and that he had made a referral for a psychiatric evaluation of
the Student. There was no follow up by the Parent of the Psychiatric evaluation.
(54, B—59, B—81 pg. 2, Testimony of Direct of Pupil Services)

On or about December 16, 2010, a PPT meeting was held in response to Dr.
Dworkin’s October 29, 2010 letter. The Parent received notice of the PPT but did
not attend. The team agreed with Dr. Dworkin and recommended a Psycho-
educational Evaluation of the Student and also agreed to implement a Behavior
Management Plan based on his recommendations and those of the school team.

 

July 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0451

13.

14.

15.

16.

17,

18.

. The Student has a negative impact on his peers. The Student’s teacher has had to

The team agreed to send home, on Fridays, a weekly behavior management chalt
of the Student’s daily behavior. (B-62, B-77, Testimony of 6m Grade Teacher)

The Parent would not give the PPT team permission to conduct a Psycho-
educational Evaluation of the Student. (Testimony of Assistant Principal)

The Parent, in various emails sent to the school, showed concern about the
Student’s behavior. The Parent considered any questions about the Student’s out
of school activities to be an invasion of their privacy and an act of harassment.
The Student was instructed to respond, “mind your own business”. The Parent
requested copies of the Student’s behavior plan and copies were sent home in the
Student’s backpack. The Parent revoked the permission to contact Dr. Dworkin.
(B~81 page 16, B-81, Testimony of Assistant Principal)

On 01' about January 27, 201 1 the Student received an in-school suspension for
inappropriate language in class. The Student’s school transportation was changed
to a van due to inappropriate and disruptive behavior on the bus. In his 6 years of
school attendance, the Student has managed to receive a total of 26 in-school and
out—of—school suspensions. (B-88 page 5, B-77)

On March 31, 201 1 a PPT was held to evaluate the Student’s eligibility for special
education and related services. The Parent was notiﬁed and called but did not
attend the meeting. The PPT continued the Student’s 504 Plan and recommended
a comprehensive evaluation to include: (1) language evaluations; (2) academic
achievement; (3) classroom obsewations; (4) functional behavioral assessment;
(5) psychiatric developmental history and social, emotional, behavioral and
cognitive assessments. The team sent a letter to the Parent informing her of the
team’s decision. The Parent did not give permission to perform the evaluations.
(B—65, B—67 Testimony of Assistant Principal)

The comment notes from the Student’s 15I grade to 5lh grade records demonstrate
that the Student is capable of doing the work and maintaining good grades. The
Student’s CMT scores were getting lower even though the Student had good
recall and capable skills. The Student began the 6Ih grade school year obtaining
standard level in his core courses; he is not currently receiving standard grade
level in any of his core courses. (B-79, B—80, Testimony of 6M Grade Teacher)

The assistant principal was concerned about the student’s ability to function in
school, his aggressive behavior, and also his inappropriate language. The Student
was suspended for sexually harassing a female student. (B-75, Testimony of
Assistant Principal, B—90)

change his methodology in class because of the Student’s impact on his peers.
During his 6‘h grade year, the Student has had 9 absences, 8 tardies, one out-of—

 

July 29, 201] Final Decision and Order 1 1—0451

school suspension and 3 in-school suspensionsi(Testimony of 6‘h Grade Teacher,
B-86)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW and DISCUSSION:

1,

The Student has not been found eligible to receive special education and related
services and is currently receiving suppott and accommodations through a 504 Plan
due to hearing loss.

IDEA has established an afﬁrmative obligation for all Boards of Education to
identify, locate and evaluate all students whom they suspect of having a disability.
C.F.R. § 300.1 ll Child ﬁnd. (a) General. (1) The State must have in effect policies
and procedures to ensure tha -- (i) All children with disabilities residing in the State,
including children with disabilities who are homeless children or are wards of the
State, and children with disabilities attending private schools, regardless of the
severity of their disability, and who are in need of special education and related
services, are identiﬁed, located, and evaluated.

Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies expand on the IDEA’S child ﬁnd
requirements and require Boards of Education in Comiecticut to make “...pr01npt
referral to a planning and placement team of all children who have been suspended
repeatedly or whose behavior, attendance or progress in school is considered
unsatisfactory 01' at a marginal level of acceptance.” R.C.S.A. §10-76d-7

Written parental consent shall be obtained prior to initial evaluation, reevaluation,
initial placement or private placement of a child who requires or may require special
education and related services. R.C.S.A.§10-76d—8. If a parent denies consent to the
board to conduct an initial evaluation of a student, a hearing ofﬁcer may order
special education evaluation or placement without the consent of such parent,
guardian, pupil or surrogate parent. Conn. General Statute §10-76h(d)(] ).

In this case, the Student's behavior for the last 6 schools years has demonstrated an
extensive pattern of deﬁant behavior and an impulsivity that places school staff and
students in danger. The Parent recognizes the Student’s behavior but wraps herself
and her son in the mantle of privacy that inhibits the Board from planning an
appropriate education for the Student. (Findings of Facts B—2, 4, 6, 8 , 9, 10 & 14)

The Parent had the Student evaluated by Dr. Dworkin, but refused to share the
complete evaluation with the Board. In a phone conversation with school personnel,
Dr. Dworkin recommended a Psycho-educational evaluation of the Student. The
strong compelling evidence presented indicates that there are genuine concerns
regarding the emotional status of the Student. The Student is at a critical juncture in
his educational journey and needs to be given all the necessary tools to be successful
in life. The Board has provided substantial reasons to evaluate the Student. The
Board cannot plan a proper educational program for the Student without evaluations
and assessments. The Board shall be permitted to conduct the evaluations as

 

July 29, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11-0451

recommended in the March 31, 2011 PPT: (1) language evaluations; (2) academic
achievement; (3) classroom obsewations; (4) functional behavioral assessment; (5)
psychiatric developmental histOIy and social, emotional, behavioral and cognitive
assessments.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

The Board shall be permitted to conduct the evaluations as recommended in the
March 31, 201 1 PPT: (1) language evaluations; (2) academic achievement; (3)
classroom observations; (4) functional behavioral assessment; (5) psychiatric
developmental history and social, emotional, behavioral and cognitive assessments.

The language evaluations, academic achievement, classroom observations and the
functional behavioral assessment may be performed by school personnel.

The psychiatric developmental history, social, emotional and behavioral and
cognitive assessments shall be performed by a qualiﬁed psychiatrist chosen by
school personnel in consultation with Dr. Paul Dworkin, The parties shall confer
and agree on an evaluator.

The Board shall provide all school records and evaluations necessary to perform the
evaluations. The school persomlel shall be allowed to answer any questions that any
evaluator may require in order to conduct an evaluation of the Student.

The Parent will not be allowed to be present during the evaluations but may observe
from another room.

The Parent will not be allowed to be present 01‘ obselye the evaluations or
assessments performed by the independent psychiatrist/psychologist or any done by
the school psychologist.

All evaluations shall be shared with the PPT and the Parent.

