October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0561

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Regional School District N0. 14 v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the District: Attorney Rebecca Santiago
Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent (Mother), pro se
and
Attorney John Cvejanovich
O’Connell, Flaheity & Attmore, L.L.C.
1350 Main Street
Springﬁeld, MA 01103—1628]

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Whether the hearing ofﬁcer shall override the Parents’ lack of consent to the neuropsychological
evaluation of the Student.

SUMMARY:

The I] year old Student is eligible for special education under the category of autism.
The District sought to have the Student evaluated by a neuropsychologist or a school
psychologist who had the background and experience to conduct a school based
neuropsychological assessment. The Parent refused to provide consent for this evaluation. The

' The Parent was initially represented by Attorney Cvejanovich. During the lengthy prehearing conference, the
Parent’s attomey was active in a discussion of scheduling the ﬁrst hearing date, selecting August 23, 2011 for the
hearing date. At the prehearing conference, the Parent’s attorney then said that he may need to schedule the hearing
for later in September. The hearing date was changed twice to accommodate the Parent’s attomey request for a later
hearing date, but an indeﬁnite postponement was denied. The date of September 20, 201 I was held for hearing but
was not scheduled. The hearing was scheduled for September 28, 20] 1, the latest date it could be held to allow for
sufﬁcient time to convene the hearing and issue a decision on or before the mailing date of October 13, 20] l. The
Parent’s attomey was sent all notices, and although he was an attomey in a law ﬁrm, no other attorney submitted a
notiﬁcation of appearance to substitute as attorney. Such inaction by the Parent’s attorney was not appropriate, and
the Parent’s attorney did not take appropriate steps to obtain substitute counsel for the Parent. Moreover, the
Parent’s attorney reponed to the District’s attomey that he was not representing the Parent in this matter, although
the Parent continued to claim that the attorney did represent her. The Parent’s attorney had notice ofthe hearing and
failed to appear or obtain a substitute attorney for this matter.

1

 

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0561

District brought this action to seek a hearing ofﬁcer order overriding the lack of parental consent
for this evaluation.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The District received this request for hearing on July 11, 201 1 [Exhibit H.O.-1] and a preheating
conference convened on July 20, 2011. At the prehearing conference, the parties agreed to a
hearing date of August 23, 201 l and a request for extension of the mailing date was submitted
and granted to allow for scheduling this hearing date.

Subsequently, the Parent’s attorney brought a second case regarding the Student who is the
subject in this case, Student v. Regional School District No. 14 (Case No. 12—0003). The request
to consolidate the two cases was granted, and the request for a 30 day extension of the mailing
date of the decision was granted, which extended the mailing date to Thursday, October 13,
2011.

The Parent’s attorney also ﬁled a request for an indeﬁnite postponement of this hearing. This
request was denied, as such indeﬁnite postponements are not permitted in IDEA cases. The
Parent’s attorney was informed that the Parent may elect to withdraw the Parent’s hearing
request without prejudice and re-ﬁle at another time when the Parent’s attorney is ready to
proceed with the hearing.

The August 23, 201 1 hearing date was cancelled at the request of the Parent’s attorney, and the
additional hearing date of September 20, 2011, which was being held for this matter, was not
scheduled at the request of the Parent’s attorney. The hearing date of September 28, 2011 was
scheduled as it was the latest possible date that would provide sufﬁcient time for the paities to
submit closing arguments or briefs and for the decision to be issued on 01' before the current
mailing date of October 13, 2011.

Subsequently, the Parent submitted a request for dismissal of her action (Case No. 12-0003)
without prejudice. The parties were notiﬁed that the hearing for the case of RSD 14 v. [Student],
Case No. 11-0561, would convene on September 28, 201 l as previously scheduled. The other
part of the consolidated action (Case No. 12—0003) was severed from this case and dismissed
without prejudice, as requested by the Parent.

The hearing convened on one hearing date on September 28, 201 1. The Parent was present with
her father. State Senator Joseph Crisco also appeared at the hearing, and stated upon his entrance
that he was at the hearing in his “ofﬁcial capacity.” Senator Crisco was told there is no such
standing in the hearings, and that he could only be present, silently, as a person lending
assistance to the Parent and that they would be provided time to consult with each other if

necessary.2

2 In addition, Senator Crisco attempted to have a telephone conversation with the hearing ofﬁcer prior to the hearing
date. Senator Crisco was directed to contact the Due Process Unit of the State Department of Education with any
questions, and that it was improper for a patty to have another person contacting the hearing ofﬁcer directly
regarding the pending matter, as it was an ex pane communication.

2

 

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0561

At the close of the hearing on September 28, 201 1 the palties were provided with additional time
for submission of written closing arguments by October 3, 2011. The District’s attorney
submitted written closing argument on Monday, October 3, 2011. The Parent submitted no
closing argument.

At the hearing, the District’s witnesses were Kimberly Culkin, District director of special
services; Danielle Hay, District school psychologist and Kristi Sacco, licensed
neuropsychologist. The Parent did not present any witnesses, although she actively cross
examined the District’s witnesses.

The District submitted exhibits numbered B-l to B—13, which were entered as full exhibits. The
Parent submitted no exhibits.

All exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision.

To the extent that the procedural history, summary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. v. Callallen

Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(“CGS”) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedures Act (“UAPA”),
CGS §§ 4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is 1 1 years old and currently placed at Easton Country Day School. [Exhibit
B—3]

2. It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services
under the category of autism.

3. On May 17, 201 1, the Flaming and Placement Team (PPT) convened for the purpose of
conducting an annual review and to plan the re-evaluation of the Student. [Exhibits B-2a,
Page 8, B-3]

4. At the May 2011 PPT meeting, the District recommended that the Student undergo a
neuropsychological evaluation of cognitive, executive and social/emotionai functioning,
as well as an occupationai therapy evaluation of fine and gross motor and sensory

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—056]

10.

1].

processing and an academic evaluation of reading, math and writing skills. [Testimony
Director, Exhibit B-3]

At this PPT meeting, the team reviewed the Student’s current needs through the
information provided by the Student’s current teachers and service providers. The Easton
Country Day School repotted that the Student was motivated and had made a lot of
progress in terms of her functioning in the school environment and in her stamina.
[Testimony Director; Exhibit B-4a] The Student’s records and reports received showed
tremendous progress. Reportedly the Student was evolving and changing over time at a
rate that was impressive and positive. This led the District to conclude that it was
important to look ﬁuther into her current functioning to design her program. [Testimony
Director]

The Student has not had a comprehensive evaluation for several years. In March 2010
there was a record review, but no additional testing was completed at that time. The last
standardized assessment of the Student was in 2008 when a Woodcock Johnson battery
was completed, which did not provide interpretation of the results In 2007 a
psychological evaluation was completed. [Testimony Director]

Since the Student had not had a comprehensive evaluation for more than three years, it
was imperative for the District to obtain current and comprehensive information about
this Student. [Testimony Director]

While the District had received anecdotal and verbal reports regarding the Student, the
District does not have current standardized information about the Student. The Student
receives extensive sewices on her IEP, and the District needs more information to
determine what services need to be added or altered to provide an appropriate program
for the Student. [Testimony Director]

The District determined that a neuropsychological evaluation would provide the
information necessary about the Student. The Student has complex needs and receives
neuropsychological sewices, so an opinion by a neuropsychologist would be of great
assistance. [Testimony Director]

As part of the neuropsychological evaluation, the District wanted to obtain information
about the Student’s executive functioning. Students’ executive ﬁmctioning allows them
to be able to proceed with the demands of a typical school day. Executive functioning is
the higher level functioning necessary to organize, plan and process information
simultaneously and shift and maintain attention. These areas of organization and
processing skills have been repotted areas of difﬁculty for the Student. [Testimony
Director]

Obtaining this information would be helpful in building a program for the Student to
work on the Student’s weaknesses and utilize her strengths. Information gleaned about
the Student’s executive functioning would be of assistance in developing strategies that
will work well in the school environment, and determining what will not work well for

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0561

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

the Student. This will assist the District in developing goals and objectives for the
Student. [Testimony Director, School Psychologist]

A neui‘opsychological evaluation would provide information on the Student’s ability to
perform tasks. Standardized test scores can be obtained to compare the Student with
students of the same age, gender and grade. In addition, information can be obtained
through observation during the evaluation. All of this information can be used to
differentiate the instruction and build a program that meets the Student’s complex needs.
[Testimony School Psychologist]

A neuropsychological evaluation can provide information about the Student’s reading
and writing. Along with completion of an academic assessment, the neuropsychological
evaluation includes a cognitive assessment and assessment of processing skills. Adaptive
skills can also be assessed in a neuropsychological evaluation, as well as learning and
memory, emotional functioning, intellectual functioning and processing skills. A
neuropsychological evaluation would help determine what methods are most effective for
this particular Student. The neuropsychological evaluation looks at academic skills and
the way students obtain these skills. [Testimony School Psychologist, Dr. Sacco]

The District requested that the Student receive a neuropsychological evaluation, and
provided the Parent with a choice of an evaluation by the school psychologist who was
qualiﬁed to complete a neuropsychological evaluation or a neuropsychologistt [Exhibit
B-13] The level of interpretation of the data would be more in depth in a
neuropsychological evaluation, which is one of the reasons the District felt it was the best
assessment for the Student. [Testimony Director]

The District had initially requested that the District staff complete the evaluation, but the
Parent had indicated that she was very opposed to District staff conducting the
evaluation. Although the Director felt the District staff could complete a comprehensive
evaluation, in response to these concerns expressed by the Parent the District proposed
that a neuropsychologist not employed by the District could complete the evaluation.
[Testimony Director]

The Parent was provided the Notice and Consent to Conduct a Reevaluation. This
document provides the Parent information about the evaluation, including the
test/evaluation procedures, the areas of assessment and the evaluation. The notices
provided clearly identiﬁed the test/evaluation procedure for the assessment by the
neuropsychologist (standardized measures, interview, record review, rating scales,
observation) or in the alternative, the school psychologist and special education teacher
(standardized measures, curriculum based standardized measures, observation, rating
scales, interview and record review). The notices also clearly set forth the areas of
assessment (reading, math, writing, adaptive, social-emotional, cognitive and executive
functioning). The evaluators — either a neuropsychologist or school psychologist/special
education teacher — were also clearly set forth in the notices. Both notices also noted that
the the assessment would include consultation with the Parent and related services

 

October 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0561

17.

18.

19.

20.

2].

providers prior to evaluation. The Parent did not consent to the evaluation. [Testimony
Director, Exhibit 13—13]3

A member of the District staff, the school psychologist, has experience and training to
conduct this comprehensive evaluation. She has the training to conduct a comprehensive
evaluation and the ability to interpret the date. The special education teacher could also
perform the academic pattion of the evaluation. Alternatively, a Connecticut licensed
clinical psychologist with expertise in neuropsychology could complete the entire
evaluation, including the academic portions thereof. [Testimony Director]

The Parent insisted that the evaluation be completed solely by Dr. Lovecky. Dr. Lovecky
is a clinical psychologist in Rhode Island. Dr. Lovecky is not a neuropsychologist and is
not a school based neuropsychologist. Dr. Lovecky is also not licensed to practice in
Connecticut. To practice in Connecticut, a psychologist needs to be licensed in this state.
Practicing in Connecticut would include providing an evaluation, a diagnosis and other
sewices. The District could not agree to the evaluation by Dr. Lovecky, a provider who
is not licensed in this state. The District has had discussions with the Parent about the
evaluators they proposed and the steps that would be taken to ensure that the Student
would be comfortable with the testing environment and evaluators. The Parent remained
dissatisﬁed with the District’s proposal, although she agreed that the Student should be
evaluated. [Testimony Director]4

The Director believes this evaluation is necessary because the District does not have a
comprehensive evaluation more recent than three to four years ago. The Student has
changed as a student and a learner since that time. The District needs to be able to move
fowvai'd to conduct evaluations about the Student’s current functioning and designing an
IE? based on the ﬁndings of the evaluation. [Testimony Director]

Danielle Hay, District school psychologist, has the experience and expertise to conduct
an evaluation of the Student. She is a diplomate of the American Board of School
Neuropsychology which endorses that she is qualiﬁed to perform school based
neuropsychological assessments. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B-8]

The District’s School Psychologist could conduct a school based neuropsychological
evaluation which could provide information on the Student’s cognitive functioning,
executive functioning, and sensory motor, attention and social-emotional needs to help
develop an educational program to help the Student to learn. The evaluation would
include a meeting with the Parents and teachers to get background information on the
Student, observation of the Student in a natural setting as well as during the assessment,

3 The Notice also requested consent for an occupational therapist evaluation. The District is not seeking to override
the lack of consent to the OT evaluation in this case.

4 In 2010, the PPT convened and there was discussion referenced in the minutes that in the future, Dr. Lovecky
would be the evaluator to complete the evaluation. Dr, Lovecky is not appropriately credentialed to complete the
evaluation that the District is seeking, and the District has the right to select the evaluator of their choice.
[Testimony Director, Exhibit 8-1]

 

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-056]

and a direct assessment in a one to one testing environment. [Testimony School
Psychologist]

22. The District’s School Psychologist has the experience to conduct an appropriate
evaluation. She has experience evaluating students with more than one disability as well
as with obsessive compulsive behaviors and autism. [Testimony School Psychologist]

23. Kristi Sacco, a neuropsychologist, is licensed to practice clinical psychology in
Connecticut, has experience in evaluating students similar to the Student, and is
experienced in completing evaluations including comprehensive neuropsychological
assessments. Dr. Sacco also has the background and experience to conduct an appropriate
evaluation. [Testimony Dr. Sacco; Exhibits B-9, B-lO]

24. There are several evaluators in Connecticut who have experience and background to
evaluate the Student, in addition to the School Psychologist and D11 Sacco. [Testimony
Director]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The District brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act [IDEA] which provides for special education and related services to children with
disabilities, from birth through age 21. Students who are identiﬁed as eligible for special
education are entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) pursuant to
state and federal laws. §§§ Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 10~76 et, seq.; the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C, § 1401, et seq.

The District is seeking to complete a neuropsychological evaluation of the Student, and
override the lack of parental consent to the reevaluation in accordance with 34 CFR
§300.300(c)(l)(ii).

As pant of any reevaluation, the IEP Team and other qualiﬁed professionals, as
appropriate, must review existing data on the Child and determine “[w]hether any additions or

modifications to the special education and related services are needed to enable the child to meet

the measurable annual goals set out in the IEP of the child, and to participate, as appropriate, in

 

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0561

the general education curriculum.” 34 CFR §300.305(a)(2)(B) The District must ensure that the
Student is assessed in all areas related to the suspected disability, including, if appropriate,
health, vision, hearing, social and emotional status, general intelligence, academic performance,
communicative status and motor abilities. 34 CFR §300.304(c)(4)

The District has the afﬁrmative obligation to conduct a reevaluation of the Student, which
must occur at least once every three years. The Federal Regulations provide:

“§ 300.303 Rccvaluations.

(a) General. A public agency must
ensure that a reevaluation of each child
with a disability is conducted in
accordance with §§ 300.304 through
300.31 1——

(l) lf the public agency determines
that the educational or related sewices
needs, including improved academic
achievement and functional
performance, of the child warrant a
reevaluation; or

(2) If the child’s parent or teacher
requests a reevaluation.

(b) Limitation. A reevaluation
conducted under paragraph (a) of this
sectioni

(1) May occur not more than once a
year, unless the parent and the public
agency agree othetwise; and

(2) Must occur at least once every 3
years, unless the parent and the public
agency agree that a reevaluation is
unnecessaiy.”

The District also has the obligation to ensure that good standards and practices are
maintained in the selection of the evaluator, and has the right to select its evaluator.
The District has reviewed the information that it has received regarding the Student from

the current placement, and has also reviewed the most recent evaluative data. The District has

 

October 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0561

appropriately concluded that the neuropsychological evaluation will provide assessment
information that is necessary to develop an appropriate program for the Student.

The District has provided substantial reasons for the Student, who has complex needs and
has not undergone a comprehensive evaluation since 2007, to undergo a neuropsychological
evaluation. The District must be able to move forward to conduct the neuropsychological
evaluation about the Student’s current functioning and designing an IEP based on the ﬁndings of
the evaluation.

The Parent’s lack of consent to the neuropsychological evaluation of the Student is
hereby overridden. The District shall be permitted to proceed with the neuropsychological

evaluation of the Student by an evaluator of their choosing.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

1. The Parent’s lack of consent to the neuropsychological evaluation of the Student is
hereby overridden.

2. The District shall be permitted to proceed with the neuropsychological evaluation of the
Student by an evaluator of their choosing.

 

