April 21, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0395

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Somers Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michael McKeon
Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Connon, LLC

646 Prospect Ave.
Hartford, CT 06105-4286

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Catherine Cushman
Connecticut Legal Services

872 Main St., PO. Box 258
Willimantic, CT 06226—258

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Whether the Board’s evaluations of the Student were appropriate.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

The Board submitted this request for hearing on April 8, 2011. On April 14, 2011 the Board’s attorney
submitted a notiﬁcation that it was withdrawing its request for due process. In that correspondence, the Board
counsel indicated that it would “litigate all the issues in one proceeding,” to wit, in the matter that was ﬁled by

the Parent’s attorney and assigned to another hearing ofﬁcer.

Upon receipt of this notice, the undersigned hearing ofﬁcer submitted notiﬁcation to the parties that the
appropriate manner to litigate all issues involving these two patties would not be to withdraw a hearing request
and unilaterally add an issue to another pending hearing, but to ﬁle a Motion to Consolidate in accordance with
Regs. Conn. Agencies Sec. 10-76h—8 in each of the pending cases. After such a ﬁling, the hearing ofﬁcers
would consult with each other and the cases would be consolidated with one of the hearing ofﬁcers.

The Board did not request a consolidation, but rather submitted an objection to the Parent’s attorney’s Motion to
Consolidate. While the Motion is reasonable, and would be gTanted if both cases were pending, with the
granting of the Board attorney’s request to withdraw the case, the Motion must be denied as Moot.

The Board has submitted a request to withdraw the case pending before this hearing ofﬁcer. With that ﬁling, the

Board‘s case is dismissed without prejudice. If the Board determines that it wants to litigate the issue that had
been pending in this case, the Board must submit another request for hearing.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

