September 2, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0461

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Wallingford Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on Behalfofthe Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey
Siegel, O'Connor, 0' Donnell & Beck, RC.
50 Trumbull Avenue
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado, Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUE:

Should the Board be permitted to conduct a psychiatric evaluation, functional
behavioral assessment (FBA), behavior rating scales and adaptive behavior scale
ofthe Student without the Parent’s consent?

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

SUMNIARY:

The Student has been as identiﬁed as Speech or Language Impaired and is entitled to
receive a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) as deﬁned in the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10-76a. At a PPT meeting, the Board requested permission
from the Parent to conduct a psychiatric evaluation, functiona1 behavioral assessment,
behavior rating scales and adaptive behavior scale of the Student. The Parent refused the
Board’s request. The Board ﬁled for due process.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(CGS) §10—76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(t) and related
regu1ations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, CGS
§§4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, and §4-181a and §4-186.

On May 20, 2011, the Board ﬁled for due process. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was
appointed on May 23, 2011 and a pre-hearing conference was held on June 6, 201 11 A
hearing date ofJuly 21, 201 1 was chosen by the parties. The Board objected to Parent’s
Exhibits 3 and 5 being made full exhibits ofthe hearing. The objection to Parent’s
Exhibits 3 and 5 was that they were letters from a doctor who was not going to testify,
The objections were sustained.

 

September 2, 2011 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0461

Five days aﬁer the conclusion ofthe evidentiary portion ofthe hearing, the Parent
requested that the hearing be reopened. The grounds for this request was that they had
obtained new evidence that would prove one oftheir witnesses lied. The Board ﬁled a
timeiy objection. The hearing was not reopened.

In order to accommodate the mailing ofthe Final Decision and Order aﬁer the hearing
date, the mailing ofthe Final Decision and Order was extended by the parties. The date
for mailing the Final Decision and Order is September 2, 2011.

This Finai Decision and Order sets faith the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact
and conclusions of laws The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set forth herein,
which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other
supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this
matter. To the extent that the Summary and Proposed Findings of Fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer and vice versa,
SAS Institute, Inc. v. S&H Computer Systems. 1110., 605 F. Supp. 816 (MB. Tenn.
1985); Bonnie Ann F. v. Callallen Ind. Sch. Bd., 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student has been identiﬁed as Speech or Language Impaired and is entitled to
receive a FAPE as deﬁned in the IDEA. (Testimony of Coordinator of Special
Education (CSE), Board Exhibitl—S)

2. In 2003 an FBA was conducted ofthe Student. Target behaviors 0ftouching, calling
out for attention, being stubborn and getting out ofthe seat were observed. The
purpose of the target behaviors was to seek attention. The Student was expected to
follow instructions and proper social skills were to be taught to the Student. (B—5)

3. On or about May 2003, the Student was found to be eligible for special education
and related services under the classiﬁcation of Other Health Impaired, Attention
Deficit Hyperactive Disorder. 1n the re-evaluation performed, it was found that the
Student, in comparison to his peers, demonstrated inconsistent attention and
concentration in his tasks. During testing the Student appeared inactive and
demonstrated inappropriate behaviors. The Student's test sessions had to be
shortened because his behaviors were impacting his performance. The Student was
licking his hands, played and ﬂipped dice, and was constantly out of his seat. (B-6,

B«7)

4. At the June 14, 2006 PPT, the Student's primary disability was changed from 01-11 to
Speech or Language Impairment. The Student's behavior improved when he was
prompted. The Student still demonstrated impulsivity. (B-10)

' Exhibits from the Student‘s home district will be referenced with a “B” followed by the exhibit number.
Parent’s Exhibits will be designated in this decision with a “P" followed by the exhibit number.

2

 

September 2,201 1 Final Decision and Order 11-0461

10.

11.

At the April 2, 2009 PPT meeting, the Parent requested that the Student be removed
from special education services and his IEP be "frozen." The Board requested that
they be allowed to conduct a reevaluation of the Student. The Parent refused the
Board‘s request. The Parent sent a letter to the Board revoking all special education
for the Student At a later date the Parent withdrew the revocation. (B-12, B—13)

By May 2009 of the 2009—2010 school year, the Student had been absent 4 days and
had received 35 disciplinary infractions. These infractions included insubordination,
ﬁghting, profanity and class problems. By May 2009, the Student's grades were as
follows: Language Arts "D", Math "F", Science "F" and Social Studies "D". (B-16,
B-26)

In May 2010, the Board conducted a psychoeducational assessment ofthe Student.
The instruments used to assess the Student were a review ofthe Student's record,
classroom observation and the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-IV).
Overall, the Student was offtask 30% ofthe time he was observed. The WISC-IV
showed that the Student had a Full Scale IQ of 60. This placed the Student in the
extremely low range for children of his age. In Verbal Comprehension the Student
scored 73, which placed him in the 4th percentile ofchildren his age. In Perceptual
Reasoning, the Student’s score of 77 placed him in the 6th percentile in the area of
abstract reasoning abilities and visual information processing. (8—16)

In May 2010 the special education teacher conducted an academic assessment of the
Student. The test was untimed. The Student scored below average in all subsets that
measuring reading, written language and oral language. The Student showed a
relative strength in mathematics. Areas involving recall of information and short
term memory were of particular concern. (B-17).

In February 2011, the PPT met to discuss CMT accomodations for the Student. At
the PPT, the Parent was of the opinion that the Student's IQ was not accurate and the
evaluations conducted did not capture "a true picture of the [Student]." The team
recommended a neuro~psycholgica1 evaluation. The Parent would consider the
evaluation ifit were done by an independent evaluator. The Parent did not sign the
releases to evaluate the Student. (B—20).

On October I, 2010, the Student threatened to stab another student; no knife was
found. The Student received a 5 day out of school suspension. (B—27 page 1,
Testimony ofAssistant Principal).

On April 27, 201 1, the Student stabbed another student in the arm with a pencil. The
Student received a one day in—school suspension for this infraction. The PPT
conducted a manifestation determination for this infraction. It was determined that
the Student's action was not a manifestation of his disability. The Student’s current
primary disability is speech or language impaired. The PPT recommended an
evaluation of the Student. The Parents refused the recommended evalution. (B-21,
Testimony of Assistant Principal).

September 2, 201 l Final Decision and Order 11-0461

12. During the 2010-20] 1 school year, the Student had seven in-school or out ofschool
suspensions. Besides the previously mentioned behaviors, the Student exposed his
bare back side in class, exhibited disruptive behavior, used inappropriate language
and had a verbal and physical altercation with another student. (B—2], B—27)

13. The Student's current 20l0-2011 IEP included counseling support services with the
school psychologist for 1/2 hour. The Parent was in disagreement with this service
and was not willing to allow the Student to attend. At the May 16, 2011 PPT, the
counseling suppoxt was removed from the Student's IEPT (Testimony of Coordinator
of Special Education, B-22)

14. An FBA is necessary in order to be able to develop a behavioral intervention plan
(BIP) for the Student. The BIP would identify the triggers that affect the Student's
behaviors and which additional supports may be necessary for the Student to have an
appropriate IEP. A behavior scales assessment would be beneﬁcial because of the
Student’s impulsivity and the results would help to clarify his special education
exeeptionality. It would assist in developing the Student's goals and objectives. The
adaptive behavior scales would assess overall adaptive functioning in a variety of
areas including socialization, social communication, conceptual and daily living
skills. These assessments would assist in the development ofgoals and objectives to
address social, emotional and behavioral needs. (Testimony of Coordinator of
Special Education, B-28)

15. A psychiatric evaluation would assist the Board in the clariﬁcation of the Student's
exceptionality and developing IEP goals and objectives. If the Student's disabilities
were different than his current disability, the Student could be eligible for IDEA
protection in a manifestation determination. (Testimony ofCoordinator of Special
Education)

16. The requested evaluations are necessary in order to know why the Student is
behaving inappropriately. The Student tends to have impulsive behaviors and the
Board does not have knowledge of what is causing those behaviors. The evaluations
will be able to show us “what can be done for the Student.” (Testimony of Special
Education Teacher, Testimony of Coordinator of Special Education)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW and DISCUSSION:

1. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive special education and related
services to obtain a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) under the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (lDEA), 20 U.S.C. {31401
et. seq. FAPE is deﬁned as special education and related services that are provided
at public expense, meet the standards ofthe state educational agency, include an
appropriate school education, and are provided in conformity with the IEP. 20

U.S.C. §l401(8),

 

September 2, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0461

2. The proposed program or placement must be reviewed in light of the information
available to the PPT at the time the IEPs were developed. B‘ L. v. New Britain Bd. of
Educ, 394 F. Supp. 2d 522, 537 (D. Conn. 2005).

3. The IDEA has established an afﬁrmative obligation for all Boards of Education to
identify, locate and evaluate all students whom they suspect of having a disability.
C.F.R. § 300.111 Child ﬁnd. (a) General. (1) The State must have in effect policies
and procedures to ensure that-- (i) All children with disabilities residing in the State,
including children with disabilities who are homeless children or are wards ofthe
State, and children with disabilities attending private schools, regardless ofthe
severity oftheir disability, and who are in need ofspecial education and related
services, are identiﬁed, located, and evaluated.

4. Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies expand on the child ﬁnd requirement of
IDEA and require State Boards of Education to make, “, . .prompt referral to a
planning and placement team ofall children who have been suspended repeatedly or
whose behavior, attendance or progress in school is considered unsatisfactory or at a
marginal level of acceptance”. R.C.S.A. §lO-76d-7

5. Written parental consent shall be obtained prior to initial evaluation, reevaluation,
initial placement or private placement ofa child who requires or may require special
education and related services. R.C.S.A.§10-76d-8. Local educational agencies are
required to ensure that a reevaluation of each child with a disability is conducted at
least once every three years, unless the parent and LEA agree that a reevaluation is
unnecessary. 20 USC § l414(a)(2). The LEA is required to provide notice to the
parents of a student with a disability that describes any evaluation procedures the
agency proposes to conduct. 20 USC § 1414(b)(1).

6. In the current matter, the Student's behavior over the last three years has prompted
the Board to seek a psychiatric evaluation and behavioral assesments of the Student.
(Findings of Fact Nos. 5, 9 and l l). The Parent has rejected all ofthe Board‘s
requests. The Student's behaviors have escalated to the point that a manifestation
determination has been conducted and the inappropriate behavior has been found not
to be a manifestation ofhis current disability. (Findings ofFact No. 11)

7. IDEA allows Boards to seek an evaluation of a Student if conditions warrant an
evaluation. C.F.R. § 300.536(b). The purpose ofan evaluation is to determine
whether a child has a disability, and the nature and extent ofthe special education
and related services that the child needs. 34 CPR. § 300.500(2). Federal and State
regulations require a school district to evaluate a Student, "in all areas ofsuspected
disability." The evaluation must be sufﬁciently comprehensive to identify all ofthe
child's special education and related services needs. 34 CPR. § 300,532(g-h). The
Student's inappropriate behaviors have created an environment where he is not only
a danger to himself but also to his peers. (Findings of Fact Nos. 10, ll & 12). The
Student's inappropriate behaviors are also affecting his ability to obtain an
appropriate education. (Findings of Fact No. 6). In this matter it is clear that the

Sept

ember 2, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0461

Student‘s actions warrant evaluations. Where a parent refuses consent for a District
reevaluation, a school district may, but is not required to, use due process procedures
to override the Parent's refusal to provide consent. See 34 CFR § 300.300(c)(1)(ii).
The Board acted appropriately in requesting additional evaluations ofthe Student
and seeking due process to override the Parent’s refusal to provide consent for the
evaluations and assessments.

The Board shall be allowed to perform a psychiatric evaluation, an FBA, a behavior
rating scales and a behavior rating scale of the Student.

To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed
herein, the Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

The Board shall be allowed to conduct a psychiatric evaluation oftlle Student
without the Parent’s consent. Within 5 business days ofthe mailing date
(September 2, 201 1) ofthe ﬁnal decision and order, the Parent shall provide the
Board with the name ofa psychiatrist or psychologist. The Board's school
psychologist shall call the psychiatrist or psychologist selected by the Parent; the
school psychologist and the psychiatrist or psychologist selected by the Parent
shall together choose an independent psychiatrist to evaluate the Student. If the
Parent does not provide the Board with the name of a psychiatrist or psychologist
within 5 business days ofthe mailing date (September 2, 2011) ofthe ﬁnal
decision and order, the Board shall chose the independent psychiatrist to evaluate
the Student.

The Board shall be allowed to conduct a behavior rating scale and adaptive
behavior scales without the Parent’s consent. Board personnel shall conduct these

two assessments.

The Board shall be allowed to conduct a functional behavioral assessment of the
Student without the Parent’s consent. Board personnel shall conduct this
assessment.

The Board shall convene a PPT 5 school days after the independent psychiatrist is
chosen. The independent psychiatrist shall be provided with all of the Student's
records s/he deems necessary to conduct the evaluation and shall be allowed to
obsewe the Student in his school environment,

 

