March 24, 201 1 —1- Final Decision and Order 1 1-0308

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. East Hampton Board of Education

Appearing on behalt‘ol‘Student: Attorney Sally R. Zanger
Connecticut Legal Rights Project
PO Box 351
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Mark Sommamga
Sullivan Schoen Campane & Connon LLC

646 Prospect Avenue
Hartford, CT 06105

Appearing before: Attorney Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Attorney Via Request for Impaltia] Special Education Hearing dated January 26, 201 1.] It was
received by the Board ofEducation (“BOB”) on January 26. The thirty—day resolution period ran
through February 27; the original deadline for mailing the ﬁnal decision and order was April 13.
A telephonic pre—hearing conference was held on March 1 . Attorney Zanger appeared on
behall’of Student and Attorney Sommaruga appeared on behalf of BOB. The following issues
were identiﬁed:
1. Did BOE timely and appropriately evaluate Student? If not, what shall be the
remedy?
2. Did BOE provide Student with an appropriate transition plan? If not, what shall be
the remedy?
31 Should BOB modify the statement of present level ofperformance in Student’s
Individualized Education Program?
4. Should BOE modify Student’s Individualized Education Program to identify actions
requested by Student and refused by BOB?

The parties participated in mediation prior to the request for due process,

1 All dates are 201 1 unless otherwise indicated,

 

March 24, 201 1 -2- Final Decision and Order 1 1-0308

Via letter dated March 9, Student’s Attorney requested an extension of the mailing date
to accommodate hearing dates. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request for
an extension of the mailing date was gTanted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order
was extended to May 13. Hearings were scheduled for April 1 and l 1.

Via letter dated March 18, Student’s Attorney reported that the patties reached a

resolution and withdrew the request for hearing with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed with prejudice.

