April 21, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0196

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Groton Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Klebanoff & Alfano, PC.

433 South Main St, Suite 102
West Hartford, CT 06110

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attomey Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.

75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2009-10 school year was

appropriate;
2. Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2010-11 school year was

appropriate;
3, Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for the placement of the Student at Franklin Academy

as of January 2010 and through the 2010-1 1 school year.

SUMMARY:

The 14 year old Student who is identiﬁed as eligible for special education and related sewices
has been diagnosed with Asperger’s disorder, generalized anxiety disorder and depression. The
Parents unilaterally placed the Student at Franklin Academy in January 2010. The parties
resolved the claims relating to the 2009-10 school year during the course of this hearing.

The Board offered the Student a therapeutic day program at a state approved private placement
for the 2010-11 school year, which the Parents refused. The Parents proceeded with this hearing
requesting reimbursement for the Student’s placement at Franklin Academy for the 2010-11

school year.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board received this request for hearing on November 4, 2010 [H.O.-l] and a prehearing
conference convened on November 17. The resolution period was waived by both panics, which

1

 

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11-0196

altered the initial mailing date of the decision to December 30, 2010. Requests for extension of
the mailing date of the decision were granted to allow the parties to schedule additional hearing

dates and submit closing argument.

On the ﬁrst day of hearing the Board submitted a document entitled “Offer of Judgment” for
payment of $44,000 to resolve all claims pertaining to the 2009-10 school year. While the
Parents asserted that the submission did not constitute a timely offer of judgment, the Parents
accepted the offer and the hearing proceeded on Issue No. 2 and the portion of Issue No. 3
relative to the 2010—1 1 school year only.

The hearing convened on six hearing dates from December 16, 2010 to March 15, 2011. One
hearing date was cancelled due to inclement weather.

Written closing arguments were submitted by both parties on April 8.

The Parents’ witnesses were Michael Blefeld, M.D., the Student's pediatrician; Elda
Chesebrough, LCSW, the Student’s therapist; Seymore Thomas Hays, educational director of
Franklin Academy; Rebecca Hays, clinical director of Franklin Academy; Wilbur Nelson,

clinical psychologist; and the Father.

The Board’s witnesses were Suzanne Talbot, Board school psychologist; Patricia Berrgren,
Board special education teacher, Kristen Pellinen, speech language pathologist; Antonina White,
Benhaven consultant; Raymond DuCharme, executive director of The Learning Clinic; and

Denise Doolittle, Board director of pupil services.

The Parents submitted exhibits numbered P—l through P-34. Objections to exhibits P-25 through
P-29 were sustained, and these documents were not entered as full exhibits. The remaining
exhibits were full exhibits.

The Board submitted exhibits number B-I through B—IOO, which were entered as full exhibits.

All exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision.

To the extent that the procedural history, summary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. V. Callallen

Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)
STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(“CGS”) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §l415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (“UAPA”), CGS
§§ 4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4-186.

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0196

FINDINGS OF FACTS:

1,

The Student is 14 years old and is currently attending Franklin Academy, where she has
been unilaterally placed by the Parents since January 2010.

It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services
under the category of autism.

The Student’s therapist explained the Student’s diagnoses and how they manifest
themselves. The Student has been diagnosed with Asperger’s disorder, as well as
generalized anxiety disorder and depressive episodes. The Student exhibits the traits of
Asperger’s disorder, including limited social skills, problems with social interactions,
difﬁculty understanding the nuances of communication such as body language, a lack of
common sense and impulsivity. Some of her actions could offend or irritate others. The
Student’s anxiety is a prevalent part of her presentation, which she expresses on a regular
basis. The Student has problems with transitions and with changes in expectations and
she has difﬁculty adjusting and adapting. The Student has also suffered from depressive
episodes, which were very pervasive in the fall 2009. [Testimony Ms. Chesebrough]

During the summer 2009 the Student had a negative experience at a summer camp in
which she was ostracized and bullied by the other campers in her cabin who were also
classmates at her school. She leﬂ the camp early due to the difﬁcult situation.
[Testimony Ms. Chesebrough, Father]

After this summer camp incident, the Student’s therapist saw the Student who told her
she was terrified to go back to school and very concerned about retaliation. [Testimony

Ms. Chesebrough]

Prior to the stait of the 2009-10 school year, the school psychologist was told of the
summer camp bullying incident by the Board guidance counselors. The Parents had
provided a list of students that were separated by the type of relationship the Student had
with the students, a“b1ack list” that indicated that the students had a bad experience with
the Student, a “grey list” in which the Student was neutral about the students and a “white
list” which indicated that the students listed had a good relationship with the Student.

The guidance department took those into account in terms of class schedule and the
students on the black list were not placed in the Student’s academic classes. [Testimony

Ms. Talbot]

As pant of the Student’s program to assist her in her emotional regulation and social
issues, the Student continued to have a checkout procedure during the 2009-10 school
year which was based on the recommendation of the Benhaven consultant and was
caiTied out by the school psychologist. This daily checkout provided the Student with an
opportunity to meet with the school psychologist about her day in a process of self
reﬂection. [Testimony Ms. White, Ms. Talbot]

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11-0196

8‘

10.

ll.

12.

13.

During the beginning of the school year, the school psychologist monitored the Student’s
interactions with her classmates. At her regular checkout procedure with the school
psychologist at the end of each day, the Student reported that her experiences with her
classmates were relatively uneventful. There was one incident in which a student in her
math class said something inappropriate, which was dealt with accordingly by the school
psychologist. The transition into school aﬁer the negative summer camp incident went
well at the beginning of the school year due to the appropriate interventions 0f the Board
staff. [Testimony Ms. Talbot]

In October 2009, the students at the Board middle school were commencing a long term
language alts/ﬁlm project. The project was introduced to the students earlier than
anticipated, and the Student had great difﬁculty in participating in the portion of the
project which included selecting a group of students with whom to work on the project.

[Testimony Father]

The language arts project is completed in groups of students. The students select the
group of four students with whom they’d like to work on the long term project. While
this project unusually begins in J anuary, the language arts teachers determined that the
students were prepared to commence the project in October. The language arts project
did not come up in the Student’s weekly team meeting, so the school psychologist had
not prepared a plan for how to facilitate the selection of the group for the Student,

[Testimony Ms. Talbot]

When the students selected groups for the project, the Student was unable to ﬁnd a
successful ﬁt for herself. While one or two groups approached her, she declined and did
not ﬁnd another group which would accept her, although she did attempt to approach
some people with whom she wanted to work, but they rejected her. At the time of this
language arts/ﬁlm project, the Student arrived at the checkout with the school
psychologist visibly upset, reporting that the groups were chosen for the project and she
was leﬂ out. At checkout, the Student expressed her concern about the group problem,
and the school psychologist told her she would work to make it better for the Student.
The school psychologist went to the language arts teacher after school and asked what
happened. That teacher agreed that the selection process didn’t go well for the Student.

[Testimony Ms. Talbot]

When the Student arrived home that day she was distraught. The Parents contacted the
school psychologist to determine what happened and how the situation could be ﬁxed.
The school psychologist said she’d need time to work on the problem and thought it
could be resolved by end of school on the next day. [Testimony Father]

The Student went to school the next day, but she experienced an emotional meltdown.
When the Parents went to pick the Student up from school, they could hear her crying
from down the hall from the school psychologist’s ofﬁce where she was waiting. In the
ofﬁce she was shaking, sobbing and wailing. [Testimony Father]

April 21, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0196

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

211

On October 26, the Monday following the group project incident, the Student’s team
meeting convened. The Student was not attending school at this time. At that meeting
the Parents notiﬁed the Board staff that they were in the process of obtaining a note from
the Student’s pediatrician to conﬁim that the Student was too emotionally fragile to
return to the school. [Testimony Ms. Talbot, Exhibit B-81]

The Student’s team reconvened on October 30 to discuss possible options for the
Student’s language arts project. At the meeting the Parents provided a note from her
physician requesting that the Student receive homebound tutoring for two weeks and the
Parents told the Board staff that they had contacted an attorney to assist in determining
the best placement for the Student. [Testimony Ms. Talbot, Exhibits B-83, P—22]

In November the Student’s therapist submitted a request to the Board that the Student
continue to receive homebound tutoring as a shmt term solution. [Testimony Ms.
Chesebrough, Exhibit P-21]

The Student was provided homebound services, including counseling services from the
school psychologist. [Testimony Ms. Talbot]

On December 21, the Pediatrician wrote a correspondence to the Board stating that due to
the Student’s fragile emotional state the Student would beneﬁt from a placement at
Franklin Academy for the remainder of the year, During this time the Student was
presenting herself in a very distressed state when she met with her doctor. Dr. Blefeld
based his suggestion for Franklin on a conversation he had with another patient’s parent
who was an art teacher at Franklin Academy. This letter was not a recommendation for
Franklin Academy, but merely a “suggestion.” [Testimony Dr. Blefeld, ExhibitP~19]

In December the Student’s therapist also wrote a letter noting that it was her professional
opinion that the Student would be best served by an out of district educational placement
and requested that the Board support the Student’s placement at Franklin Academy. She
wrote this letter because she no longer felt that the Board’s school was a safe place for
the Student and it wasn’t a good educational experience for her. The therapist stated that
at the school, the Student was ostracized, exploited, bullied, did not feel safe and her
anxiety was overwhelming. This experience was interfering with the Student’s ability to
absorb information. The therapist based her recommendation for the Franklin Academy
program on the information that the Parents provided to her, as well as her visit to the
program approximately seven years ago. [Testimony Ms. Chesebrough, Exhibit P—l4]

Effective January 14, 2010, the Parents enrolled the Student in Franklin Academy and
requested that the Board ﬁnancially support her program at Franklin. [Testimony Father,

Exhibit B—89]

In February 2010 the Board agreed with the Parents to hire Dr. Wilbur Nelson, Jr., Ph.D,,
to compete an evaluation of the Student. [Testimony Dr. Nelson, Exhibit P-6]

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11—0196

22.

23.

241

25.

26.

27.

28.

Dr. Nelson conﬁrmed that he could complete the evaluation, but not until April. The
Board agreed to this timeframe as most professionals in the ﬁeld have time constraints
clue to caseloads and the patties had mutually agreed to have this professional complete
the evaluation. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

Dr. Nelson evaluated the Student on April 22, May 6 and May 22. [Exhibit B—93] The
Board was not provided a copy of the evaluation repait until the night before the J une
Flaming and Placement Team [PPT] meeting. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

Dr‘ Nelson conﬁrmed that the Student’s diagnosis was Asperger’s disorder, general
anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder, single episode in paitial remission.
[Testimony Dr. Nelson, Exhibit B—93]

The report concluded that the Student should not return to the public school for the 2010—
1 1 school year. The psychologist recommended that the Student be educated in an
alternate placement as it would be emotionally damaging to return to the public school.
The report noted that the Student carries strong and powerful memories regarding her
painful interactions with peers in the middle school. The psychologist also noted that
with time and proper planning the Student could return to the Board high school, as long
as there is substantial preparation to assist the Student with the transition. [Testimony
Ms. Doolittle, Exhibit Bv93]

The Board Director conveyed to the psychologist that she was not pleased to receive the
report the night before the PPT meeting without a phone call before, as it was difﬁcult to
plan a recommendation for placement for the Student. The Director reviewed the report
and shared her draft recommendation with the psychologist that she would recommend
two approved special education programs with which she was familiar, The Learning
Clinic and High Roads, and he informed the Director that those placements would be
appropriate. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

The PPT convened on June 9, 2010. Dr. Nelson attended the meeting and presented his
repmt. The Board offered the Student an Individualized Education Program [IEP] for the
2010—1 1 school year at a therapeutic day program, either The Learning Clinic or High
Roads. This recommendation was consistent with Dr. Nelson’s suggestion that the
Student be educated in an alternate placement away from the painful interactions with her
peers. The Board requested that the Parents consent to release of the Student’s records to
both programs. The Parents refused consent to release the records to either program and
requested placement at Franklin Academy. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle, Father; Exhibit F-
94] The Parents would not allow the release of the Student’s records and application
submission to either program because “she wasn’t going there.” [Testimony Father]

At the time of the PPT meeting, Dr. Nelson did not opine that the Student should not be
moved from Franklin nor did his repoﬂ state such an opinion, Months after the PPT
meeting and during the course of the hearing, Dr. Nelson offered his opinion that the
Student should not be moved from the school now, although he also testiﬁed that he
could not comment on the educational program at Franklin, nor did he recommend that

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0196

29.

30‘

31.

32.

33.

34s

35.

the Student attend Franklin Academy. He also testiﬁed that he doesn’t make
recommendations for or endorse programs. Offering an opinion that she should not be
moved from Franklin would have been valuable and important input for planning of the
Student’s program, but while he attended the PPT meeting he never indicated that was his
position until he testiﬁed in J anuary 201 1, seven months after the meeting and about
eight months after he had last seen the Student. [Testimony Dr. Nelson, Ms. Doolittle]

The Board has successfully transitioned the Student from the elementary school to the
middle school and the Student was able to transition to Franklin Academy. [Testimony

Ms. White, Dr. Nelson]

The Director is familiar with The Learning Clinic as the Board has experience with
another student with Asperger’s disorder who attended the program and made
considerable progress. The Director has met the staff at the program and observed in the
classroom. It is a state approved program with certiﬁed staff and is located in their
region. The Director felt it would be a very appropriate placement for the Student.
[Testimony Ms. Doolittle, Exhibit B-98]

The Director also had experience with a student who had attended High Roads, and she
was familiar with their program and comfortable and conﬁdent in their methodologyi She
felt High Roads had comprehensive services and would be another option that she would
consider. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle, Exhibit B-99]

The Director felt that The Learning Clinic would be the best ﬁt and she was hopeful that
they could come to an agreement with the Parents once they saw both programs.

[Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

The Student should be in an approved special education school because she has the
potential to be a successful college student but needs the suppott of well-trained special
education teachers. She would beneﬁt from a research—based teaching style, and it is
imponant for the school to be able to implement an IEP. The Student should be exposed
to and participate in the curriculum of a typical ninth grade student. [Testimony Ms.
Berggren] Both The Learning Clinic and High Roads would provide such an educational
experience to the Student, as well as provide the necessary counseling and emotional
suppott. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

At the June PPT meeting, the parties also discussed a transition plan to return the Student
to public school for the 2011—12 school year, in accordance with Dr. Nelson’s
recommendations. The transition meetings didn’t take place as the Parents initiated due
process in fall 2010 and it was unclear what program the Student would be attending and
from where she would be transitioning. Therefore, it was unclear how to direct staff on a
transition. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

The Parents refused to look into either of the placements proposed by the Board and
reﬁtsed permission for her application and records to be provided to these schools. They
would not cooperate in this process as they were not going to agree that she could go to

April 21, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0196

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

either of the schools. [Testimony Father] The Parents never contacted the Board about
either placement subsequent to the PPT meeting and did not request that the Board set up
visits for either placement. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle]

The Student is currently attending Franklin Academy as a residential placement. A
residential placement is not necessary for the Student to meet her objectives in her IEP
and obtain educational beneﬁt from the program. If the Student were provided
instwction following appropriate methodologies she would make appropriate progress in
a day program. [Testimony Ms. Doolittle, Ms. White, Ms. Talbot]

Franklin Academy is not a special education school approved by the State of Connecticut.
Franklin does not implement IEPs for students, nor do they monitor a student’s progress
on their IEP. Franklin does not align its program with Connecticut standards, nor does it
align its program with the courses high school students are expected to take. Franklin
does not use research based methodologies that are based on peer review. [Testimony
Mr. Hays] The Student’s current counselor at Franklin Academy is not licensed in

Connecticut. [Testimony Ms. Hays]

The Franklin Academy clinical director could not provide a professional opinion about
the impact of removing her from the Franklin Academy school environment. [Testimony

Ms. Hays]

The Learning Clinic is approved by the State Department of Education and can issue a
high school diploma. It follows the core cun‘iculum and provides counseling through a
staff of licensed clinicians. They develop IEPs which are collaborative. They chart data
for every student and compare gains empirically against the baseline. They also assist in
the transition of students back to their home school. [Testimony Drl DuCharme]

The Learning Clinic has a place in their program for a 14 year old ninth grade girl, but
would have to complete an intake process to determine whether the Student would be

accepted. [Testimony Dr. DuCharme]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Parents brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities

Education Act [IDEA] which provides for special education and related services to children with

disabilities, from birth through age 21. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive a

free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) with special education and related services

under the disability category autism pursuant to state and federal laws. E Conn. Gen. Stat. §§

10-76 et. seq; the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C. § 1401, et seq.

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1~0196

The standard for determining whether a FAPE has been provided is set forth in M
Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District V. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982). The
two-pi‘onged inquiry set forth in R0_wley asks ﬁrst whether the procedural requirements of IDEA
have been reasonably met and, second, whether the IE? is “reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational beneﬁts.” LL at 206-207

Nothing in the record supports the conclusion that there were any procedural violations
which resulted in a denial of FAPE t0 the Student.

The second prong of Rowley is the determination of whether the Board offered the
Student an appropriate IEP. The proper gauge for determining the IEP is substantively
appropriate is the question of “whether the educational program provided for a child is
reasonably calculated to allow the child to receive ‘meaningfui’ educational beneﬁts.” Mrs. B. v.
Milford Board ofEducation, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120 (2nd Cir. 1997). Meaningful educational
beneﬁts are “not everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents.” Tucker v. Bay
Shore Union Free School Dist, 873 F.2d 563, 567 (2nd Cir. 1989). Rather, school districts are
required to provide a “‘basic ﬂoor of opportunity’ . . . [by providing] access to specialized
services which are individually designed to provide educational beneﬁt to the handicapped
child.” Mex, M, 458 US. at 201; geealﬂ K.P. v. Juzwic, 891 F. Supp. 703, 718 (D.Conn.
1995) (the goal of the IDEA is to provide access to public education for disabled students, not to
maximize a disabled child’s potential)

The Board’s proposed IEP for the Student provided the appropriate supports and services
to enable the Student to obtain educational beneﬁt in a state approved therapeutic day program
[Exhibit B—94] Her IEP appropriately addressed her needs for organizational skills, as well as

the social skills and emotional supports which are vital for the Student. While the evaluator

April 21, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0196

noted that it was reponed that the Student’s mood was better due to a “more benign peer
environment, along with the opportunity to live apart from her family” [Exhibit B-93], nothing in
the record suppoﬂs a conclusion that the Student requires a residential placement to obtain
educational beneﬁt.

While Dr. Nelson stated during testimony that now the Student shouldn’t be removed
from Franklin Academy because he understands she feels comfortable and safe, that testimony
was unpersuasive. The members of the PPT did not have the beneﬁt of this input at the critical
time, i.e., during the PPT meeting when they were planning the Student’s programs It was
unclear from his testimony whether Dr. Nelson had a new opinion in retrospect or was basing his
opinion merely on the fact that the Student was there, so she should not be moved as of his
testimony in J anuary 201 1. But either way, the failure to provide this opinion in J une did not
allow the members of the PPT to use this input to plan a program for the Student at that time.
Moreover, Dr. Nelson’s opinion that the Student should not be moved from the Franklin
Academy program was that she felt safe and comfortable there. Dr. Nelson has not seen the
Student at Franklin Academy since May 2010 when he was conducting his evaluation, so it is
wholly unclear why he opines that she should not be moved “now.” Dr. Nelson apparently is
basing his opinion on someone's repoxt to him that the Student feels safe and comfortable there,
since he had had no contact with the Student for many months. It is not based on his ﬁrst hand
knowledge of the Student's emotional presentation, nor a conclusion of an updated evaluation.
Therefore, this conclusion is unpersuasive.

The Board has met its burden of proof, demonstrating by a preponderance of evidence

that the IEP for the 2010—2011 school year offers the Student a FAPE.

10

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0196

Because the IEP offers an appropriate program in the LRE, the Parents are not entitled to
reimbursement for any other placement as the IDEA “does not require [a local educational
agency] to pay for the cost of education, including special education and related services, of a
child with a disability at a private school or facility if that agency made FAPE available to the
child and the parents elected to place the child in a private schoolfacilily.” 34 C .F.R. §
300.403(a) (emphasis added); see also M.C. ex rel. Mrs. C. v. Voluntown Bd. of Ed., 226 F. 3d
60, 66 (2d Cir. 2000)‘

It also must be noted that the Parents thwarted the Board’s ability to process the Student’s
intake at either therapeutic day program because they refused to sign the consent to release
records to either program and would not allow an application to be made on behalf of the Student
to either program. Failure to cooperate in providing consent to or making students available for
evaluations can be reason to refuse reimbursement for tuition spent on private programs and
services See P.S. v. Brookﬁeld Board of Education, 353 F.Supp. 2d 306 (D.Conn, 2005)

While it is already found that the Board has offered the Student an appropriate program, it must

be noted that such lack of consent did thwart the ability to fulther process the Student’s intake at
either program, and such lack of consent is an inappropriate tactic to be taken by Parents, which
on its face would be sufﬁcient reason to deny a reimbursement claim.

The Board has developed and offered an appropriate IEP for the Student for the 2010-1 1
school year. Therefore, the Parents’ request for reimbursement for the cost of placement at

Franklin Academy must be denied.

’ Only ifi! is concluded that the IEP is procedurally or substantively deﬁcient must we reach the ﬁnal step and ask
whether the Parents‘ placement is appropriate to meet the needs of the Student. AC. and MC. v. Board of
Education of Chappaqua Central School District 553 F. 3d 165, 51 IDELR 147 (2"d Cir. 2009)

ll

April 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11-0196

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
1. The Board offered the Student an appropriate program for the 2010—1 1 school year.

2. The Board is not responsible for reimbursement of the Parents’ unilateral placement of
the Student at Franklin Academy during the 2010—1 1 school year.

12

 

