June 21, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0355

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Westpoxt Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on Behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Marsha B. Moses, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUES:

11 Were the speech and language evaluations performed by the Board in 2010
appropriate? If not;

2. Are the Parents entitled to an independent speech and language evaluation at public
expense?

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
SUMMARY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as a student who is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education (“FAPE”) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Improvement Act (IDEIA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10-76a. At a PPT meeting, the Parents rejected the program offered by the Board
for the 2010-2011 school year. The Parents were not in agreement with the speech and
language evaluations performed by the Board and requested an independent speech and
language evaluation of the Student at Board expense. The Board denied their request and
ﬁled for due process as required by 34 C.F.R. § 300.502.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(CGS) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, CGS
§§4-176e to 4-178,inc1usive, and 4-181a and 4-186.

On or about March 15, 201 1, the Board ﬁled for due process. An impartial hearing
ofﬁcer was appointed on March 16, 201 1 and a pre-hearing conference scheduled for
April 6, 201 1. The Parents were not available and another pre-hearing conference was

scheduled for April 7, 201 1. The Parents again were unavailable for the pre—hearing
conference and a hearing date of May 4, 201 1 was scheduled. Notice of the hearing date
was sent to the Parents. The Board submitted 26 exhibits which were received as full

exhibits of the Board.

On or about April 26, 201 1, the Parents presented a witness list and the Board objected to
the relevancy of three of the Parents’ witnesses. The Parents were asked to present an
offer of proof as to the witnesses. As of the day of hearing, no offer of proof had been
received from the Parent. The parties agreed to ﬁle post hearing briefs and a brieﬁng
schedule was agreed to by the parties. The post hearing briefs were to be ﬁled by May 18,

2011.

The date for the mailing of the ﬁnal decision and order was extended on the record with
the agreement of all parties in order to accommodate the hearing date and the mailing of
the ﬁnal decision and order. The mailing date for the ﬁnal decision and order is June 21,

2011.

This ﬁnal decision and order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact
and conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set forth herein,
which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other
supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this
matter. T0 the extent that the Summary and Findings of Fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered and vice versa, SAS Institute Inc. v.

S&H Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F. Supp. 816 (M.D. Tenn. 1985); Bonnie Ann F. v.
Callallen Ind. Sch. Bd., 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993).

 

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is a student in the Board’s school and has not been identiﬁed as a
student requiring special education and related services as deﬁned in IDEIA 20
U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a. (Board’s Exhibit-
101, Testimony of School Psychologist)

2. The Mother expressed concern with the Student’s reading capabilities. The Mother
was concerned that in the 1St grade, even though the Student had made gains in
reading, it was recommended that he continue reading during the summer in order
not to regress. This same recommendation was also made in the Student’s 2"d grade
progress report. (Testimony of Mother, B-l, B-2)

3. In January 2010, the Father expressed concern about his son’s school performance
and asked the school psychologist for assistance in helping his son succeed. The
school psychologist spoke with the Student’s teachers. The regular education
teacher stated that the Student was doing grade level work and did not need support.
The teacher found that the Student was on grade level but at the insistence of the
Parent did an assessment. The teacher used Response To Intervention (RT!) as part

' Hereafter Board’s Exhibits will be noted with “B” followed by the exhibit number,
2

 

of identiﬁcation procedures for learning disabilities and to see if there was a need
for regular education support services to be provided. A meeting was held to
discuss the ﬁnding with the Parents. Although the school team did not feel the
Student needed support, RTI suppon was provided for him in reading. (Testimony
of School Psychologist, B-4)

4. In May 2010 it was noted that the Student was making progress in his RTI in
reading. The Student, before RTI, did not read grade appropriate books but now it
was noted that he was making progress with this issue. (Testimony of School

Psychologist, B-5)

5. The Parents continued to be concerned with the Student’s language, language
decoding and executive functioning and they had the Student evaluated by the
Sofﬁt Center. The evaluation showed that the Student had a full scale IQ of 102 and
average reasoning skills, vocabulaiy knowledge and social judgment. The Student
was found to have a slow processing speed and difﬁculties with word retrieval.
Emotionally, the Student was affected at times by expressive struggles and
difficulty focusing on relevant details. He was concerned about what was wrong
with him. The Sofﬂt Center recommended that the Student have a comprehensive
language evaluation and recommended that the Parents contact the school regarding
a Section 504 Accommodation Plan. (B-6)

6‘ The Parents shared the summary report of the Sofﬁt Center evaluation with the
Board. The Parents requested a PPT. On September 16, 2010 a PPT was held to
review the Sofﬁt Center evaluation. Based on the evaluation provided by the
Parents, the team recommended a comprehensive speech and language evaluation
by the school’s speech and language pathologist and a psychologica1 evaluation by
the school psychologist. (8-10)

7. The school psychologist performed a psychological evaluation of the Student. The
evaluator observed the Student in the classroom and noticed that the Student was
obsewant and attentive and when he was called upon he was able to respond. The
Student was not afraid to ask for assistance when he was unsure of how to proceed.
He appeared socia11y comfortable and readily engaged in conversation with his
peers. In the evaluations conducted, the Student demonstrated strength in shou term
memory and his working memory was we11 developed. His verbal ability and long-
tenn retrieval skills were age appropriate but the Student demonstrated relative
weakness in processing speed. It was recommended that the Student should be
regularly and consistently monitored by the RTI team. (Testimony of School

Psychologist, BM)

8 . An educational assessment was performed by the special education teacher, The
Student demonstrated sufﬁcient academic skiﬂs in reading, written language and
math to be successful in his grade curriculum. (B-15)

 

9. Before performing a speech and language assessment of the Student, the speech
and language pathologist reviewed the evaluation from The Sofﬁt Center and did
informal interviews of the Student’s teachers. She obtained information from other
evaluators who had performed other assessments. The speech and language
pathologist performed the following assessments: (1) Comprehensive Assessment
Of Spoken Language (CASL); (2) Test of Auditory Process —3 (TAPS—3); Test of
Nan'ative Language (TNL); Test of Word Finding 2"d Edition (TWF-Z); and The
Listening Comprehensive Test-Z (LCT‘2). (Testimony of Speech and Language
Pathologist, P—12)

10. The speech and language pathologist is a well qualiﬁed pathologist who has
worked with children in a school setting for 6 years. The pathologist received
formal training in graduate school and in a fellowship on how to conduct
evaluations. She has diagnosed, managed, planned, written and implemented
programs for children with language impairment, learning disabilities and autism,
She has performed extensive speech and language evaluations. (8-26)

1 1. The CASL showed that the Student’s language skills, expressive, supralinguistic
and syntactic skills were within the average range. The expressive language portion
of the assessment uses subsets to evaluate spoken language including vocabulary,
sentence structure and use of grammatical morphemes. The supralinguistical
language composite evaluated higher level language skills that are necessary to
succeed in higher grades. This assessment would have indicated speciﬁc areas of
the Student’s weakness. The assessment demonstrated that the Student’s
supralinguistical language skills are within normal range when compared to his
peers. (Testimony of Speech and Language Pathologist, P—12)

12. The TNL showed that the Student’s narrative comprehension was not as strong as
his oral narration, but his Narrative Language Ability Index was within the average
range. The Student had problems with character names but he did well with plots
and content; he scored within the average range in this assessment. (Testimony of
Speech and Language Pathologist, P-12)

13‘ The TWF—2 is a standardized assessment of word ﬁnding skills. These are
assessed across different word naming contexts: Picture Naming Nouns, Picture
Naming Categories and Sentence Completion Names. The Student demonstrated
adequate comprehension of all target words. (Testimony of Speech and Language
Pathologist, P-l2)

14. The TAPS—3 evaluates the ability to process information that is presented verbally
with no visuals. This assessment evaluates the Student’s ability to understand and
learn language, evaluates basic memory processes when information is presented
orally and also evaluates the ability to retain information, understand, and infer
meaning. The Student scored within the average range on the overall composite
score. (Testimony of Speech and Language Pathologist, P—12)

 

15, The Listening Comprehension Test evaluated listening skills in a real life
classroom setting. The Student scored within the average range on the overall
composite score. (Testimony of Speech and Language Pathologist, P—12)

16. While there are other tests of language skills that can be performed, many 0fthem
look at the same areas as were tested. There was no other test performed because it
would be unethical to continue testing the Student when he is showing
developmental skills within the average range (Testimony of Speech and Language
Pathologist)

17. The evaluations conducted by the Board were provided to the Parents and the
results of the evaluations were discussed with the Parents. At the November 1 1,
2010 PPT the Student was found not eligible for special education and related
services but was referred to the Section 504 team. The Parents requested an
independent speech and language evaluation but the Board denied the Parents’
request. The Board then requested this hearing. (Testimony of School
Psychologist, B—16)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1‘ The Board ﬁled this request for hearing in accordance with the provisions of 34
CFR Section 300‘502(b) which provides that if “a parent requests an independent
evaluation at public expense, the public agency must, without unnecessaty delay,——
[ﬂile a due process hearing to show that its evaluation is appropriate,” if the
parent’s request is not granted. The sole issue to be determined is whether the
Board’s evaluations are appropriate.

2. In determining the standard of appropriateness of an evaluation, the focus is on
whether the evaluation (1) used a variety ofessential tools; (2) was administered by
trained, knowledgeable, and qualiﬁed personnel; (3) was administered and
conducted under standard conditions and in accordance with instructions provided
by the producer of the assessments; (4) incorporated information from various
sources such as classroom observations and review of existing data; and (5) whether
the independent evaluation would provide any new or additional information.
Warren G. v. Cumberland County School District, 190 F.3d 80, 87 (3rd Cir. 1999)

3. The speech and language pathologist followed all professional standards for
evaluations, conducted all protocols and inspected all areas of language testing.
She used instruments that are accepted and used as legitimate assessment tools
within the speech and language pathologist profession.

4. The pathologist conducting the speech and language evaluation was well
qualiﬁed, thoroughly trained, skilled and knowledgeable, with appropriate
credentials for completing the assessment. The speech and language evaluation used
multiple tools and assessments, which further leads to the conclusion that this
assessment was appropriate, This protocol was followed, and set forth in great

 

detail in the comprehensive report. The speech and language evaluation is clearly
appropriate in its use of nondiscriminatory assessments tools which included
observations.

5. The speech and language evaluation conducted by the Speech and Language
Pathologist complied with all professional standards and was appropriate. In the
professional manner in which the speech and language evaluation was conducted
and completed, there is no additional or better information that could be obtained
from another speech and language evaluation.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The speech and language evaluations performed by the Board are an appropriate
evaluation and meet all IDEIA criteria for an appropriate evaluation.

2. The Parents are not entitled to an Independent Speech and Language Evaluation at
the Board’s expense

