March 7, 2011 -l- Final Decision and Order 11~0300

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Trumbull Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street

Milford, CT 06460
Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

._.

Whether the Student’s primary disability is appropriate;

2. If not, whether the Student’s primaly disability shall be autism;

3. Whether the Board offered the Student a free appropriate public education [FAPE] for the 2009-
10 school year;

4. Whether the Board offered the Student FAPE for the 2010-11 school year;

5. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education;

6. Whether the Parents’ placement of the Student at CCCD is appropriate;

7. Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for the CCCD tuition, as well as the transpontation

costs.
PROCEDURAL HISTORYmISCUSSION:

This request for hearing was received by the Board on February 3, 2011. A preheating conference
convened on February 15. On Febmaiy 22, the Parents submitted a Motion to Consolidate this case with
another pending case, Case No. 11-0262, which had been ﬁled by the Board. Prior to action on this
Motion to Consolidate, the Board withdrew its Request for Hearing in Case No. 11—0262. Based on this,
the Motion to Consolidate was denied as Moot.

On Friday, March 3,2011, the Board submitted a request that the undersigned hearing ofﬁcer take
jurisdiction over the Board’s issues which were pending in Case No. 11—0262. On March 4, the Parents
submitted notice that they were withdrawing their case without prejudice. The Motion to take
jurisdiction over the Board’s issues was denied, as the Board’s case had been dismissed without
prejudice. If the Board elects to proceed on their issues, a request for due process should be submitted
to the Due Process Unit. As the Parents have submitted a Notice that they withdraw their request for
hearing without prejudice, this matter is hereby dismissed, without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

