June 23, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0428

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v1 N01walk Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents/Student Attorney David Shaw

The Law Ofﬁce of David C. Shaw, LLC
34 Jerome Ave., Suite 210
Bloomﬁeld, CT 06002

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michael McKeon

Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Connon, LLC
646 Prospect Ave.
Hanford, CT 06105—4286

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim

Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1.

Whether the Board has failed to provide appropriate and safe transportation for the
Student between Norwalk and the Foundation School during the 2008-09, ESY 2009,
2009-10 and 2010-11 school years, with the support services necessary to make that
transportation successful;

Whether the IEPs for the Student were inappropriate in that the transportation provided
by the Board was not meeting the Student’s needs in that Board did not properly
accommodate the severe anxiety disorder that the Student has developed relating to
transportation;

Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for the transportation and related support that
they have incurred and will continue to incur as a result of the Board’s failure to provide

adequate transportation and support;

Whether the Board has interfered with the Parents’ and Student’s exercise of their federal
rights and intimidated and retaliated against them for exercising their federal rights
relating to transportation in violation of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act and the

Americans with Disabilities Act;

5. Whether the Board shall provide transportation relating to the Student’s education at the
Foundation School by an appropriately trained transportation provider acceptable to the
Parents;

6. Whether the Board shall provide extended day services in the home by an appropriately
trained provider acceptable to the Parents to support the transition to school each day;

7. Whether the Board shall retain a mutually acceptable behaviorist to train all
transpoitation providers and support personnel;

8. Whether the Board shall provide adequate and sufﬁcient mental health support services
by a provider acceptable to the Parents to address the Student’s anxiety relating to
transportation;

9. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education;

10. Whether an order shall issue requiring the Board to cease all violations of the Parents’
and Student’s rights under Section 504 and the ADA;

l 1. Whether the Board shall pay to the Parents and Student money damages for interfering
with the exercise of the Parents’ and Student’s federal rights and for intimidating and
retaliating against the Parents and Student for exercising their federal rights.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

This request for hearing was received by the Board on May 2, 201 I and a prehearing conference
convened on May 9, 201 l, The hearing convened on June 20 with the parties present, but
without counsel present. The Parents conﬁrmed on the record that they have been appointed co-
plenary guardians of the Student. At the hearing, the Parents and the Board representative
confirmed that the settlement agreement was ﬁnalized and signed. Therefore, this matter is
dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

