August 1, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0389

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v1 Norwalk Board of Education

Appearing on behalfof Student: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Klebanoff & Alfano PC
433 South Main Street, Suite 105
West HaItford, CT 061 10

Appearing on behalf of the Board 01‘ Education: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses
Bel'chem Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captloned matter was requested by Student’s
Attorney via letter dated April 5, 201 1‘1 It was received by Board of Education’s (“BOE’S”)
Attorney on April 6. The thilty-day resolution period ended May 6 and the original deadline to
mail the ﬁnal decision and order was June 20.

A telephonic pl'e-hearing conference was held on April 18. Attorney Alfano appeared on
behalf of Student and Attorney Moses appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issue was
identiﬁed: Should BOE be required to fund Student’s placement at Devereux Glenholme School
from November 30, 2010 through the end of the 2010—1 1 school year and/or for the 2011-12
school year?

Via letter dated April 18, Student’s Attorney requested a 60-day extension of the deadline
to mail the ﬁnal decision and order to accommodate mediation on June 1. After fully considering
the positions of the parties and consistent with Connecticut State Regulations Section 10—7611—
9(a), a 30-day extension of the mailing date was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal
decision and order was extended to July 20.

The patties participated in mediation on June 1‘ They did not resolve the case in
mediation. Student’s Parents were not available to participate in a hearing from June 20 through

July 1 1. Via letter dated June 14, Student’s Attorney requested a forty—ﬁve day extension of the

1 All dates are 201 1 unless otherwise indicated,

August 1, 20] I Final Decision and Order 1 1-0389

mailing date to accommodate Student’s Parents’ work commitments. After fully considering the
positions of the parties and the above state regulation, a 30-day extension of the mailing date was
granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until August 19.

The parties were given until June 30 to indicate dates on which the patties were mutually
available for hearing. Student’s Attorney indicated the need for three hearing dates to put on her
case and BOE’s Attorney indicated the need for two to three hearing dates. The panties offered
one mutually available hearing date: August 4,

Via letter dated July 14, Student’s Attorney requested a 45-day postponement of the
August 4 hearing date on the bases that a PPT meeting was scheduled for August 1 and might
inﬂuence the status of the ease and that Student’s Parents were unavailable on August 4. The
request for postponement was treated as a request to postpone the August 4 hearing and to extend
the mailing date. After fully considering the positions of the parties and the relevant state
regulations, the request for postponement was denied.

Given that Student’s Parents did not appear to be prepared to proceed to hearing, that
they had been granted multiple extensions of the mailing date, that they had indicated limited
availability for hearing, and that they anticipated that the PPT meeting might impact the status of
the case, the Hearing Ofﬁcer determined that proceeding to hearing might be premature.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer indicated an inclination to dismiss the case without prejudice and
allow Student’s Parents to l‘e-ﬁle the case. Student’s Parents appear to anticipate that the August
I PPT meeting may impact the status of the case if not resolved and at a time when they are
available to proceed to hearing. Prior to such dismissal, the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the patties
an opportunity to show cause why such dismissal should not be issued. The parties made no

written statement showing cause why the case should not be dismissed without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed without prejudice.

