June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v1 Trumbull Board of Education

Appearing on Behalf of the Parents: Attorney Nora Beianger
Law Ofﬁce ofNora A. Belanger, LLC

10 Wall Street
Norwalk, Connecticut, 06850

Appearing on Behaifofthe Board: Michelle Laubin, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.

75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado, Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUES:

l, is the program offered by the Board for the 2010-2011 school year appropriate and
does it provide the Student with a free and appropriate education (FAPE) in the least
restrictive environment (LRE)? If not:

2. Is placement ofthe Student for the 2010—201 1 school year and the summer of 2010 at
the Connecticut Center for Child Development, Inc. (CCCD) appropriate and did it
provide the Student with a FAPE in the LRE?

3. Is the extended school year program (ESY) offered by the Board for the summer 2010
appropriate and did it provide the Student with a FAPE in the LRE'?

4. Is the transition plan offered by the Board appropriate?

5. Is the functional behavioral analysis (FBA) appropriate to provide the Student with an
appropriate behavior intervention plan (BIP)?

6. Should the Board reimburse the parent for the evaluations, observations and
consultations by the Parents’ experts?

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

SUMMARY and PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student is a student who has been identiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive a free
and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabiiities
Education Improvement Act (IDEIA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10-76a. At a PPT meeting, the Parents rejected the program offered by the Board for
the 2010—20] 1 school yeart

The Parents and the Board disagreed on the proposed IEP and the services to be provided.
The Parents requested outplacement at the PPT and wrote a ietter to the Board that they
would be seeking outplacement at CCCD effective June 2010, Their request was denied and
the Parents ﬁled 3 Due Process request on July 21, 2010. The Parents enrolled the Student at

CCCD on June 28,2010.

June 14,2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS)
§10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(f) and related regulations, and
in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, CGS §§4v176e to 4—178,
inclusive, and 4—181a and 4-186.

On or about July 21, 2010, the Board received notice ofthe Parents’ request for due process,
An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on July 21, 2010 and a pre-hearing conference
was held on July 29, 2010. At the pre-hearing conference the Parent requested to amend the
request for due process. There was no objection by the Board and the request was granted.
The patties were also notiﬁed the amendment would alter the IDEIA timeline that had been
in effect with the original notice ofdue process to the Board. The Parent amended the due

process request.

Mediation was held on August 23, 2010 and did not result in an agreement. The matter
proceeded to hearings on the following dates September 16, 17, 23, and 24, 2010; November
5, 11, and 30, 2010; December 1, 6, and 17, 2010;1anuary 14 and 24, 2011; February 11 and
18, 201 1; and March 7 and 23,2011.

The Board ﬁled a Motion to Observe the Student at his current program. The Parents ﬁled a
timely motion objecting to the observations The Motion to Observe the Student was denied.
At the commencement of the hearing the parties agreed that the 2009~2010 school year shall
not be an issue for this hearing.

This Final Decision and Order set fonth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set forth herein, which
reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supported
evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the
extent that the Summary and Proposed Findings of Fact actually represent conclusions of
law, they should be so considered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer and vice versa, SAS Institute Inc.
L S&H Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F. Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985); Bonnie Ann F. v.
Caliallen Ind. Sch. Bd., 835 F, Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993).

 

At the request ofthe parties, in order to accommodate the mailing ofa ﬁnal decision and
order aﬂer the hearing dates and to allow additional time for the mediation, the date for
the mailing ofthe Final Decision and Order was extended.

The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is June 14, 2011.

FINDINGS OF FACTS:

11 The Student is eligible to receive special education and related services as a student
with Autism The Student had been a student at CCCD since March 2003, The school
district paid for the placement ofthe Student at CCCD for the 2007-2008, summer of 2008

June I4, 201l Final Decision and Order 11—0040

and 20082009 school year. The placement of the Student at CCCD was primarily for
aggressive behaviors. (Testimony ofFather, Board’s Exhibit 1~23)

2. In 2001, the Student was ﬁrst evaluated and diagnosed as having autism by Dr.
Michael Powers. In his evaluation, the Doctor recommended CCCD as an appropriate
program for the Student. The Student was found to have limited language skills and was in
need ofan extensive program of Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA). There was a concern
for the Student’s behavior. The Student was not enrolled in CCCD and was maintained at
the Board‘s school. This was one six ofevaluations performed by the Doctor. The Doctor
did not consult the school staff for this evaluation. (Testimony of Dr. Michael Powers,
Testimony of Father, B—l7)

3. In January 2003, the Student once again was evaluated by Dr. Powers. The Student
exhibited disruptive behavior'and was putting things in his mouth and ingesting them. The
Doctor recommended immediate enrollment in a full-day, year-round special education
program specializing in children with autism. He also recommended an immediate
functional behavior analysis (FBA) and treatment plan of the exhibited behaviors. The
Doctor also found an improvement in the Student’s communication and decoding skills and
recommended that the Parents pursue an eligibility detemiination from the Department of
Mental Retardation. This determination would open the door for access to specialized family
support funds. In March 2003 Dr. Powers performed an educational update to his January
evaluation. Once again the Doctor recommended that the Student should be placed in a
highly specialized placement like CCCD. On or about March 27, 2003, the Parents’
unilaterally placed the Student at CCCDI The Student’s behaviors placed him at signiﬁcant
risk physically and, as a result of the behaviors, possibly in need ofa more restrictive
educational placement. (Testimony of Du Michael Powers, B-39, B-45, B-46)

4. Since an early age the student has demonstrated a behavior problem. The Parents
placed the Student at CCCD because ofa “behavior breakdown”. The Student had to be held
down and urinated everywhere. The Student’s behavior improved when he was placed at
CCCD, The Student demonstrated behavior issues at home and in the community setting.

(Testimony of Father)

5‘ In February 2006, Dr. Michael Powers re-evaluated the Student and found the
standard measures of intellectual functioning showed the Student to be well below age
expectations. The Student continued to need a full year highly specialized educational
program and recommended that the Student’s speech and language services and
occupational therapy services be incorporated into his IEP. The Student demonstrated very
signiﬁcant prompt dependencies. During the re-evaluation, the Student would begin a
response and look for attention to proceed further. The Parents were the only informants on
the Vineland II Adaptive Behavior Scales. (Testimony of Dr‘ Michael Powers, B-74)

6. At the June 5, 2007 PPT meeting, the Parents requested placement of the Student at
CCCD for the 2007—2008 school year. The Board agreed to fund the placement. The PPT
agreed to provide the Student with 30 hours per week of services to be implemented at
CCCD. During the 2007- 2008 school year, the Student continued placement at CCCD by
agreement ofthe Parent and the District. CCCD was meeting the Student‘s needs but was

' l-Iereaﬁer Board’s Exhibits shall be noted as “B” followed by the exhibit number

3

June 14,201] Final Decision and Order 11-0040

not in compliance with the IDEIA mandate of LRE. At the June 5, 2007 PPT, the team noted
that the Student had made major improvement in decreasing his stereotypical behavior and
prompt dependency from staff at CCCD. The team suggested exploring a return to the
Student’s home school and involvement in the District’s community. The Parents reported
that the Student had made positive progress and was participating in trips to the swimming
pool and movies. (Testimony of Father, B—89)

7. CCCD is a private special education school approved by the State of Connecticut that
specializes in the disability ofautism utilizing the methodolog of Applied Behavior
Analysis (“ABA"), The school is speciﬁcally structured to address the sensory, behavioral
and communication issues consistent with autism. Programs are designed and progress is
reviewed through daily program data and regular, formal, objective testing, including such
instruments as the Assessment ofBasic Language and Learning Skills (ABLLS) and the
Checklist of Adaptive Living Skills (CALS) The IEP is developed from data obtained from
these formal assessments. CCCD employs highly qualiﬁed and supported staff with every
staffmember extensively trained in ABA methodology. Students are in classrooms with
certiﬁed special education teachers and an aide who is cettiﬁed or in the process of
certiﬁcation as a behavioral analyst. Data is entered in a computer and can be drawn and
reviewed from any computer in the network. There are multiple layers ofsupervision at the
building level and frequent team meetings to insure integration ofthe program. A Board
Certiﬁed Behavioral Analyst (BCBA) is always on site and assigned to each classroom. A
certiﬁed special education teacher is in the classroom, and trained staff rotate among
students in l to 1—1/2 hour shiﬁs for generalization to avoid “staff speciﬁc behavior,”
Generalization for home and community are integral to the program with daily living skills
addressed on-site with facilities for cooking, showering, and mock clinics for dental or
haircut desensitization. Parent counseling and training is available in the home as necessary,
based on data taken in the home and analyzed. CCCD offers an extended day program aﬁer
school, which the Student has historically attended, to address goals and objectives
including community outings and leisure activities. ESY at CCCD does not differ from the
regular year program. CCCD has outreach programs for school districts and consults and
helps train stafﬁ (Testimony CCCD BCBA, B-106, Parent’s Exhibit2 76, P-77, P—78)

8. On or about February 2008, at the request of the Parents, Drt Powers performed
another psychological evaluation of the Student. At this time, the Student had been enrolled
at CCCD for 5 years. The Doctor performed the Stanford—Binet Intelligence Scale 5th
Edition and found that the Student had a Non-verbal IQ of 42, Verbal IQ of 43 and a Full
Scale IQ of 40. The Doctor noted that an FBA and BlP had been performed in order to
address the Student’s vocal stereotype behavior. The Student also demonstrated motor
stereotype behavior in the form of running back and forth, hand flapping and bouncing on
his bed and on chairs. The Student demonstrated substantial cognitive disability. The
Student’s social skills standard score remain the same as the 2006 evaluation. The Student
still demonstrated a strong need for prompting. It was recommended that CCCD change
from using edibles as the primary reinforcement to using tokens. The Student was having
problems with consistent patterns ofelimination at night. The Doctor recommended the
Parents eliminate all naps to ensure that the Student have a more consistent pattern of
sleeping. CCCD plan for reducing stereotypy included a plan that ifthe Student did not
respond to a known demand the staff would physically prompt him through the task, present

2 Hereafter Parent’s Exhibits shall be noted as “P” followed by the exhibit number,

4

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

the task again and continue until the Student completed the task. (Testimony of Dr. Michael
Powers, B—99, 8-93)

91 In the February 2008 evaluation, Dr Molteni participated in the evaluation and
performed the cognitive piece. The Doctor noted that the Student’s motor stereotypy was not
affecting his academics. Data was only being taken on Student’s vocal stereotypy, not the
motor stereotypy. The Doctor was of the opinion that a onetime per month parent training
was appropriate. The Department of Social Services should provide services in the home.
Incidents of Student behavior were being kept. The Student got loud during the observation
but this did not interfere with the other students in the class. The Doctor was aware 0fthe
planned transition ofthe Student from CCCD to the District school. Once the Student
arrived at the district school the Doctor recommended that they needed to look at his
behaviors in the new setting. The PPT needs to conceptualize and develop the Student’s
transition plan to address goals and objectives that will support adaptive living skills with
community based supports. (Testimony of Drt Molteni, P-2 and P—3)

10, During the 2007—2008 school year from 12/07 to 3/08, the Student made progress.
The Student had mastered 16 objectives and had made satisfactory progress in 27 objectives.
Two of the objectives that the student received satisfactory progress were classiﬁed as
behavior reduction objectives. Data collected showed a downward trend and this resulted in
an increase in the Student’s exercise breaks. The Student was able to complete a 12 step task
analysis for remaining on task while using the bathroom. The Student was then scheduled to
start working independently on going to the bathroom. Two objectives that had not been
implemented were in speech and language. There was no FBA performed of the Student
while at CCCD. (Testimony of District’s BCBA, B-101)

1 1. At the February 2008 PPT, it was agreed to conduct an occupational therapy (OT)
and assistive technology (AT) evaluation ofthe Student, The evaluator did not utilize
standard testing measures for school performance because the Student’s disability was so
severe he would have scored 3 standard deviations below average if tested. In comparison to
the prior 2004 OT evaluation, the Student would hold things longer and more tightly. The
evaluator noted that the Student had made gains in seIf-care skills as well as using the
bathroom independently. There had been no progress in the area of handwriting, copying
simple shapes and manipulating writing tools. OT services were not available at CCCD. The
OT therapist also conducted further consultations in the area of augmentative
communication and tested 2 devices, the I-Chat and the Dynavox M-3. The I-Chat screen
was too small and difﬁcult to see. Using the Dynavox Mv3> the Student had difﬁculty with
the symbols and also was not available for testing in the District The predecessor to the M—
3, the Min-Mo, was available and the evaluator recommended its use. (Testimony ostt

Kardos, B-59, B-100)

12. In June 2008, the Board proposed that the Student complete his summer program at
CCCD and enter the district’s SRP in the fall of20081 The Board attempted to schedule a
transition meeting to plan the transition to the Board’s program. The Parents would not
attend the meeting and requested a PPT. They were under the impression that the issue of
transition was only being explored and not a formal proposal. (B-112)

13. The Special Education Teacher of the Board’s Specialized Resource Program (SRP)
did an observation ofthe Student at CCCD in order to evaluate his ability to transition to the

5

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

District’s school for the 2008-2009 school year. She observed the Student in a 1-1
environment being successful> responding and being able to respond using edibles as
prompts and the use of physical reinforcements when asked by the Student. The Student was
not involved with non—disabled peers. The staffat CCCD seemed to ignore self—injurious
behavior. The observer felt that the Student would be successful transitioned to the District‘s
school for the 2008-2009 school year. (Testimony of Special Education Teacher ofthe SRP)

14. In June 2008, Dr. Molteni observed the Student at CCCD. The Doctor did not
observe any aggressive tantrum behavior. He observed the District’s planned SRP for the
Student. The program was to be supervised by the Institute for Professional Counseling,
which specialized in setting up autism programs. He observed that the program was
responsive to individual student changes and managed more signiﬁcantly impaired students
in the coming years, but it had not yet developed the instructional methodologies and
responsive system necessary to address the Student’s complex needs. The Student needs a
BCBA involved in his programming and ABA throughout the entire day. The Institute for
Professional Counseling was not going to continue their involvement. Dr. Molteni did not
agree with the Student being transitioned to the District’s SRP classroom. (Testimony of Dr.

Molteni, 1’4)

15. The SRP in the District was an ABA—based program. The Student would receive
direct instruction in reading, math and independent living skills provided by a special
education teacher and an ABA paraprofessional. The Student would also receive speech and
language therapy and occupational therapy by certiﬁed and licensed staff. (B-l 12)

16‘ On or about November 2008, the Parents informed the Board that they were not in
agreement with the transition of the student to the District’s school. The Parents requested
that Dr. Michael Weiss consider the utility of the SRP progTam given the Student’s
developmental status and to comment on strategies that may be useful to the Student. The
Board agreed to allow the Doctor to observe the Student. The Doctor recommended the
Student’s transition to the District’s school. The observer found that the Student was very
prompt dependent and would beneﬁt from a more typical environment. (Testimony Dr.

Weiss, 13-16)

17. During the 2007-2008 school year, the Student, out ofa total of34 objectives
mastered 24 and received a code of other in 10. In his reduction of stereotypy behavior, his
episodes ranged from 13485 each day. The data collected showed that the Student was on a
downward trend with most days falling below 55 episodes per day. Although this was
progress, his skill acquisition was slower than anticipated and therefore received a code of
other. In his bathroom objective, the Student was becoming too prompt dependent and
waiting too long to go to the bathroom and received a progress code of“other”. (B-1 1 l)

18‘ In October 2008, CCCD completed a Bracken language evaluation ofthe Student.
This evaluation resulted in a list oflanguage and concepts that the Student knew and did not
know. This would assist the PPT to develop future academic goals and objectives for the
Student. In May 2009, CCCD completed the Checklist of Adaptive Living Skills (CALS).
This repon provided an indication of the Student’s current level of performance in reference
to his personal, home, community and employment living skills. The student’s employment

living skills were not evaluated. (B—142, B-l45)

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

19. On or about November 2008, the Parents ﬁled for due process. The parties mediated
the matter and reached a settlement that resolved all issues. The Board agreed to maintain
the Student at CCCD for the 2008-2009 school year and included a transition to the district’s
schooi commencing in March 2009 and through the 2009 ESY. The transition plan was that
the Student would attend the district’s program for one to two days per week and the balance
of his week spent at CCCD. Staff from CCCD was on site at at! times when the Student was
attending the program at the district’s schoolt The goal ofthe district was to “mimic” the
CCCD program. All parties acknowledged progress during this one or two day-per—week
time in Trumbull when CCCD was on site full—time. (Testimony of Ms Heam, B-138, B»

144)

20. The SRP program was a seifcontained program with 6 students. The student teacher
ratio was 1 to 1. The Student received 45 minutes ofinstruction each day in reading, math,
language ans and independent living skills instruction. The Student participated in the
mainstream setting with his para for homeroom, lunch, uniﬁed alts and pro-career training.
The Student received 3 hours per week of speech and language therapy, 2 hours per week of
occupational therapy, 45 minutes per week of adaptive physical education, about 6 hours
each day of behavioral support and 45 minutes each week of community participation. The
BCBA provided services for 6 hours each week. Prior to the transition, the student received
3. (P—28> B—151)

21. In December 2008, CCCD presented a progress report ofthe Student from 9/1 1/08 to
12/1 1/08V The Student’s IEP contained 38 objectives The report showed that the Student
had mastered 13 objectives and had made satisfactory progress in the other 25 objectives,
The Student had mastered his 19‘" objective: independent use ofthe bathroom. This was
done with the use ofedible tokens. The objective would be continued without the use of
edible tokens. The data showed that the Student’s seIf—injurious behavior (SIB) was within a
range ofO—39 instances. (8-141, P-66, P—67)

22. Ms. Hearn, BCBA from ACES, was retained by the Board in March 2009. She was
hired to spend 6 hours on the Student’s progTam and observe the Student. Stereotypy was
the oniy behavior she obsewed. She observed prompt dependency when Student had to do
laundry. If Student banged on a table, the staff from CCCD would back the Student away
from the group setting and when backed in he got upset but not as strongly‘ She observed in
the spring of 2009 and summer of 2009 mal adaptive behaviors, repetitive motions, hand
play, touching, grinding teeth and exaggerated movements. In March 2009, the Student’s
behavioral intervention plan was updated to include SIB.(Testimony Ms. Hearn, P-78)

23. In March 2009, the Student began to transition to the SRP classroom. He was
accompanied by staff from CCCD and the CCCD staff was present to observe the SRP staff
implement his ABA programs and behavioral interventions. The Student progressed well in
his goals and objectives during the transition. The Student began attending the SRP
classroom full time in September 2009. (Testimony of BCBA, SRP Special Education
Teacher, Ms Heam)

24. On or about November 3, 2009, the Parent notiﬁed the Board that she was taking the
Student to Dr. Powers. The Student was again evaluated by Dr‘ Powers on or about
November 12, 2009. The Doctor noted that since the transition to the district‘s school, the
Student displayed a signiﬁcant increase in the frequency and severity of problem behaviors.

7

 

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

The Student displayed an increase in hand banging, stomping and tantrums. On the Daily
Living Skills domain and sub domain, the student fell to the low range. Skills regression was
noted in all domains. In the Socialization domain, he also fell to the low range. The increase
in the severity and frequency ofthe Student’s behavior interfered with his educational
program and placed him and others at risk, and interfered with and limited his ongoing
developmental functional communication, academic skills,dai1y living skins and adaptive
coping strategies. The Doctor noted that there had been an insufﬁciency ofdata coilected
and an insufﬁcient analysis of his many topographies of problem behaviors The Doctor
noted an insufﬁcient level of BCBA support for the Student, The student requires a
placement in an intensive and specialized full year program for individuals within the
Autistic spectrum, The Doctor was ofthe opinion that the program at the Board’s school
was not appropriate for the Student. (P-57 pg 10 & 18, Testimony of Dr. Michael Powers, P-
28)

25. Vineland 11 Adaptive Behavior scale from 2001 to 2009 as repented by Dr. Powers:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2001 Age 2003 Age 2006 Age 2008 Age 2009 Age
Domain Equivalent Equivalent Equivalent Equivalent Equivalent
Communication: 2yrs,2 mths 2yrs,6 mths
Receptive 2yrs,6 mths 2yrs,6 mths 2yrs,2mths
Expressive 2yrs,3 mths 2yrs,6mths 2yrs,2 mths
Written 5yrs,6 mths 4yrs,1 lmths 5yrs,10
' mths
Daily Living 2yrs,3 mths 2yrs,5 mths
Skills:
Personal 3yrs,6mths 3yrs,9 mths 3yrs,6 mths
Domestic 5yrs,6 mths 5rs,6mths 5yrs,5 mths
Community 4yrs,7 mths 4yrs,6mths 3yrs,7 mths
Socialization: 1yrs,6 mths 1yrs,7 mths
Interpersonal limonths 1YR 1 mth 1yrs,6 mths
Relationships
Play and 9 months 1 year 1yrs,2 mths
Leisure
Coping Skills 2yrs,3 mths 2yr5,10 mths 2yrs,10

mths

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(B-l7, 13—39, B-75, 8-99, B-152)

26. The transition was completed and the Parents noted a change in the Student’s
behavior once the Student was fully transitioned to the Board’s school. The Student
demonstrated more aggressive and disruptive behavior in the home and the community. The
Student had more toileting incidents and had difﬁculty sleeping and an increase in prompt
dependency. (Testimony of Parents)

27. The district staffmade a home visit and made suggestions for aﬁer-school routines
that might assist the Parents with the Student’s aggressive episodes at home. A PPT was
held on October 1, 2009 to review the Student’s program, The PPT offered Physical
Management Training for the Parents to enable them to respond to the Student’s aggressions
at home, (Testimony ofSRP Special Education Teacher, P-23)

8

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

28. During the 2009-2010 school year, the Student spent time with non-disabled peers.
The Student ate in the cafeteria and participated in workshops with non-disabled peers. They
also came into the Student’s classroom and he responded well with other students. In the
community, the Student interacted with non—disabled peers It took a full year for the
Student to access all rooms in the middle school. ((Testimony of Special Education Teacher)

29‘ On or about December 2009, the Parents received the ﬁnal progress report from the
Student’s private speech and language pathologist. The Student had been receiving three 45
minutes sessions each week and this had been reduced to one 45 minute session per week
aﬁer the Student had been transitioned to the SRP classroom. The pathologist noted that the
Student had been demonstrating an increase in verbal preservation. These are requests
mainly for bathroom. They were interfering with the Student‘s progress during the
September to December 2009 period, The pathologist also noted aggressive behavior during
the Student’s therapy. These occurred 3—4 times during the same period and redirection was
in the form ofa time out. Relating these aggressions to the Parent, she was informed that the
aggressions are seen also at home but at a greater intensity, (P-29)

30. The Occupational Therapist testiﬁed that the Student’s behavior during his OT
sessions was manageable. There were no objectives for computer prior to her working with
the Student. The Student mastered his OT goal for the 2009—2010 school year. He has
participated in ﬁne motor tasks involving functional handwriting and cutting. The Student
can cut in a straight line with V2 inch accuracy. There were new objectives created for the
2010-201 1 school year and sensory integration was built into the Student’s program
(Testimony Occupational Therapist, P-23, P—19l, B~194)

31. The Student’s Speech and Language Pathologist recommended 3 hours per week for
the 2010—2011 school year. It was an administrative decision to go to total hours. The
Student did not master any speech and language goals but did master some ofits objectives.
(Testimony of Speech and Language Pathologist, B-l9l, B-216)

32. On or about January 2010, Dr John Molteni, conducted a school observation ofthe
SRP classroom. The Doctor reviewed the data related to the Student and found that various
topographies of behavior showed increase over time while others that had been at a higher
level had decreased. Looking at the totality ofthe topographies of behaviors it showed an
increase trend. The Doctor was not given and did not ask for all of the graphic data but was
verbally given the information by the staff. There had been no additional analysis ofthe
Student’s behavior since his return to SRP classroom. He was not shown an FBA ofthe
Student and recommended that one should be done. The Doctor was ofthe opinion that the
SRP classroom was a good program but did not meet the needs ofthe Student. The Student
should not be transitioned to the Board‘s high school, (Testimony of Dr Molteni> P-30)

33. The BCBA from CCCD has been involved with the Student since 2003. In the 2009—
2010 school year the Student was transitioned to the Board’s school but in June 2010 the
Student was returned to CCCD. While the Student was at CCCD, they did not provide any
direct service in the home, but provided parent training each month at CCCDt (Testimony
CCCD BCBA, Testimony of Dr. Powers)

 

June 14,2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0040

34. The Student was not able to interact well with peers; pairing with higher functioning
peers was begun and the Student started to follow through with responses to peers. The
Student went out to the supermarket one time each week and malt, movies or aquarium 1
time each month. The Student responded well but if he was having a bad day, the special
education teacher would not take him out. On the outings, the teacher worked on Student’s
goal 0fthings to get and make change. The primary way this was communicated to the
Parents was through the log book. Tantrum behaviors were interfering with progress and
were the only behaviors that interfered with his general education classes. They lasted more
than 2 minutes. Parent was not provided with the Behavior Support Plan created in May
2010 nor did they provide any input to the BIP. The Student was not allowed to return to the
Kennedy Center because of his behavior. There was no transition plan for the new setting at
the high school. The Student needs behavioral regulation in order to be successful in the
community. (Testimony of SRP Special Education Teacher)

35. The program proposed by the Board for the Summer 2010 and the 2010—201 1 school
year is in many respects consistent with the IEP proposed for the 2009-2010 school year.
The Student would continue in the SRP classroom at the Board’s high school. This was a
new program at the high school that had not been tried there before. Goals and objectives
were developed for the Student in reading comprehension, calendar skills, language arts,
math, functional language, gross motor, ﬁne motor, pre—vocationai and supponed
employment, independent living, dai 1y living skiils and functional academics. There were no
formal evaluations done for this PPT only curriculum based evaluations. There was no
transition plan for the new setting in the high school. A visit to the high school was not
possible because the building was under construction. It was only possible to walk outside
the building. (Testimony of SRP Special Education Teacher, B494)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive speciai education and related
services to obtain a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) under the Individuals with
Disabilities Improvement Act (IDEIA), 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. FAPE is deﬁned as special
education and related services that is provided at public expense, meet the standards of the
state educational agency, include an appropriate school education, and are provided in
conformity with the IEP. 20 U.S.C. §1401(8).

2. The proposed program or placement must be reviewed in light of the information
available to the PPT at the time the IEPs were developed. B. L. v. New Britain Bd. of Educu
394 F. Supp, 2d 522, 537 (D. Conn. 2005).

3, The standard for determining whether FAPE has been provided begins with the two
prong test established by the Supreme Court in Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson
Central School District v. Rowley, 458 US 176 (1982). First, the procedural requirements of
the IDEA must have been met by the school district. Second, the individualized educational
program must be reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁt.
Since Rowlex, courts have clariﬁed the requirements of FAPE to hold that individualized
educational programs offered to children with disabilities must provide more than a trivial
educational beneﬁt. (See Polk v. Central Susquehanna Intermediate Unit 16, 853 F.2d 171
(3rd Cir. 1988), cert denied, 488 US. 1030 (1989)

10

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

4. Where parents allege a procedural violation under the IDEA, a Hearing Ofﬁcer may
ﬁnd a denial of FAPE ifthe violation 1) impeded the child's right to FAPE; 2) signiﬁcantly
impeded the parents' opportunity to participate in the decision-making process regarding the
provision of FAPE; or 3) caused a deprivation ofeducational beneﬁts. 20 U.SC. §
1415(0(3)(E); 34 CFR § 300.513(a); Winkelman v. Parma C191 Sch.Dist., 127 S. Ct. 1994,
2001 (2007).

54 The Parent alleges various procedural errors by the Board including: failure to share
behavioral documents with the Parents and failure to obtain input on, or consent for
procedures in the FBA or BIP in developing the IEP for the 2010—11 year; failure to respond
to the Parents’ urgent concerns about behaviors and prompt dependency; failure to schedule>
then abruptly cancelling the annual review PPT. These alleged violations do not reach the
level of procedural error on the part of the Board to constitute a denial of FAPE to the
Student. The Parents allege that using total yearly hours instead of hours per week ofservice
for related services in the 2010-201 1 school year is a procedural violation which results in a
violation which denies the Student FAPE. Public Act 10-15 mandates a school year of 180
days of schools. This would translate to 36 weeks ot‘schoolt The Board alleges that the
Student‘s 2010-201 1 IEP which states 90 hours of speech and language services translates to
3 hours per week. This would mean that the Student would receive services for only 30
weeks. This is the ambiguity that the parent alleges violates FAPE. This ambiguity is not
fatal to the IEP since testimony clearly stated that the level of services to the Student would
be maintained at the 2009-2010 school year and the Student would receive 3 hours of speech
and language services, 2 hours of OT services and .75 hours of adaptive PE. The Board
should clarify the IEP to reﬂect the weekly services. Lump sum service hours are appropriate
when they are aocess-based accommodations and it is not reasonable to predict the amount of
time the student would actually use the accommodation. J.L. v. Mercer Island School
District 575 F3d. 1025, 52 iDELR 241 (United States Court of Appeals, 9”I Cir. (2009))
Amended by the Court at 592 F.3d 938, 53 IDELR 280 (United States Court oprpeals, 9|h

Cirt (2010)).

 

6. In addressing the 2"d prong ofRowley, IDEIA does not itselfarticulate any speciﬁc
level ofeducational beneﬁts that must be provided through an IEP. The Supreme Coun,
however, has speciﬁcally rejected the contention that the “appropriate education" mandated
by IDEA requires states to “maximize the potential of handicapped children.” Walczak v.
Florida Union Free School District, 27 IDELR 1135 (2d Cir. 1998), citing Rowley, supra. An
appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress, not
regt‘ession. id. The goal ofIDBA is not to maximize a special education child’s potential, but
rather to provide access to public education for such children. K.P. v. Juzwic 891 F. Supp.
703, 718 (D,Conn. 1995) This access is considered a “basic ﬂoor ofopportunity” for the

students Banks v. Danbugy Board ofEducation, 238 F. Supp. 2d 428 (D. Conn. 2003).

 

7. There is no one standard for determining what constitutes a meaningful educational
beneﬁt. The Student’s capabilities, intellectual progTess and what the LEA has offered must
be considered along with grade promotions and test scores in determining whether the
program offered is reasonably calculated to confer a nontrivial or meaningful educational
beneﬁt to the child. See, e.g. Hall, 774 F.2d at 635. Objective factors such as passing marks
and advancement from grade to grade can be indicators of meaningful educational beneﬁts

11

 

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0040

but are not in and ofthemselves dispositive. See, e.g., Mrs. B. v. Milford Bd. of Educ., 103
FM 1120 (2nd Cir. 1997).

8. The Board states that the Student’s stereotypes, “will continue to manifest themselves
for the foreseeable future and that with appropriate instructions, the Student is able to acquire
skills despite the presence ofthese behaviors.” (Board’s PostTrial Brief pg 33) Although it
is probably true that the Student’s behaviors will continue in the foreseeable future, when the
behaviors affect the ability of the Student to make progress they need to be addressed
(Findings of Facts # 24 & 34)> but not necessarily with behavioral goals. A district is required
to consider strategies, including positive behavior interventions. Academic progress in of
itselfdoes not establish receipt of FAPE. The fact that a Student makes academic progress
despite his severe behavioral problems indicates that he is receiving an educational beneﬁt.
Lathrog R-II School District v. Grey, 54 IDELR 276 (8"1 Cir. 2010) cert denied 1 lLRP 3206
(U.S.01/18/11), The [BF does not require behavioral goals and in this matter the IEP for the
2010—201 1 school year does reference the Student’s BIP for minimizing the Student’s
behaviors and stereotypes that would interfere with the Students academics as required by

IDEIA.

9. There is no speciﬁc reference in the IEP about how to deal with interfering behaviors
at home. A student’s behaviors at home are not in and ofthemselves a sufﬁcient reason to
state that the IEP does not provide the Student FAPE. The [BF must merely address those
behaviors that impact the Student’s ability to beneﬁt from his educational program or that
interfere with the learning ofothers The Student’s IEP does focus on what can be done in the
environment that the school district can control. The Student has a BSP that addresses
behaviors that are known to manifest throughout the school day. The BSP contains speciﬁc
steps to decrease the Student‘s interfering behaviors. The Student’s annotated IEP for the
2009—2010 school year show that the Student was beneﬁting from his educational program
and even though as the Parents state his behaviors at home had deteriorated, they did not
impede the Student from making progress in his TEPl This same BSP would have followed
the Student to his new program for the 2010-201 1 school year and would have addressed
behaviors that are known to manifest through the school day. The Board had offered the
Parent Physical Management Training. (Findings of Facts # 23)

10. IDEA also requires that the IEP planned for each child contain, beginning at age 14,
a statement ofthe transition service needs (U.S.C. Section 1414(d)(1)(A)(vii). 34 CPR.
300143 (a) Transition services means a coordinated set of activities for a child with a
disability that--

(1) ls designed to be within a results—oriented process, that is focused on improving the
academic and functional achievement ofthe child with a disability to facilitate the child ’s
movement from school to post—school activities, including postsecondary education,
vocational education, integrated employment (including supported employment), continuing
and adult education, adult services, independent living, or community participation;

(2) Is based on the individual child’s needs, taking into account the child’s strengths,
preferences, and interests; and includes--

(i) Instruction;

(ii) Related services;

(iii) Community experiences;

(iv) The development of employment and other post«school adult living objectives; and

12

June 14, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0040

(v) Ifappropriate, acquisition of daily living skills and provision ofa functional vocational
evaluation.

(b) Transition services for children with disabilities may be special education, ifprovided as
specially designed instruction, or a related service, if required to assist a child with a
disability to beneﬁt from special education.

§300.347(a)(7), which requires parents ofa child with a disability to be informed about their
child‘s progress at least as often as parents of nondisabled children and for the report to
include information on the extent to which the child’s progress is sufﬁcient to enable the
child to achieve the goals by the end ofthe year.

Section 300.29(a) deﬁnes transition services as a “..,eoordinated set of activities for a student
with a disability that — (1) Is designed within an outcome-oriented process, that promotes
movement from school to post-school activities, including postsecondary education,
vocational training, integrated employment (including supported employment), continuing
and adult education, adult services, independent living, or community participation; (2) Is
based on the individual student’s needs, taking into account the student’s preferences and
interests; and (3) Includes - (i) Instruction; (ii) Related services; (iii) Community experiences;
(iv) The development of employment and other post-school adult living objectives; and (v) If
appropriate, acquisition ofdaily living skills and functional vocational evaluation. 34 C.F.R.
Section 300.29(b) states that “Transition services for students with disabilities may be special
education, if provided as specially designed instruction, or related services, if required to
assist a student with a disability to beneﬁt from special education” In addition, 34 CFR.
Section 300.347(b)(2) requires the statement of transition service needs to include, if
appropriate, a statement of interagency responsibilities or any needed linkages.

i 1. The transition services (special education and/or related services) that the Student
needs in order to move from school to post-school activities, which include independent
living and employment or postsecondary education, must be identiﬁed, Then, the question
becomes whether the school district has provided the appropriate, individualized transition
services required by the Student. The transition service plan is not an immovable rock that
cannot be changed, but is a work in progress that during the course of time changes as the
Student’s behavior and growth academically, socially and in daily living skills will require
ﬁne tuning At the present time the Student‘s transition service plan is appropriate.

12. While the IDElA does not require districts to ease transitions between educational
environments, some children may require transition plans to receive a meaningful educational
beneﬁt. Maine Sch. Admin. Dist. #61, 49 lDELR 264 (SEA ME 2008). Children with autism
often have great difﬁculty with changes in their daily routines. The Student has clearly
demonstrated that transitions and changes are difﬁcult for him to manage. It is simply not
reasonable to expect that this Student, who has consistently experienced signiﬁcant difﬁculty
in coping with even minor changes in his daily routine, could just arrive at the school on the
ﬁrst day of high school and cope successfully with all the newness and strangeness inherent
in that situation. The student requires a transition plan to the high school aligned with this
start ofthis new chapter in his life. The district has not considered the student‘s individual
needs when it developed an EP that did not address how to handle his transition to the high
school, A simple visit to show him the grounds of his new school is not sufﬁcient. At the
very least a similar plan as was done when the Student transitioned from CCCD to the
district’s middle school might have been sufﬁcient. The ESY for the summer of 2010 should
have included a means oftransitioning the Student while at the same time ensuring that the
transition would not be a regression. I also agree with Dr Powers that there is an insufﬁcient

l3

 

June 14, 201] Final Decision and Order 11-0040

level of BCBA support for the Student. These deﬁciencies in his lEP would not allow the
Student to receive FAPE in his new environment.

13. This does not mean that the Parents’ remedy ofa unilateral placement at CCCD is the
solution or would be the appropriate placement for FAPE in the LRE, CCCD does not meet
the LRE ofthe lDElA. The Student can be educated with children who are not disabled. The
severity 0fthe Student’s disabilities may impede him from receiving his academic classes in
the mainstream setting but participating in the lunchroom and uniﬁed alts, homeroom and
adaptive PE would allow the Student to the maximum extent appropriate to be with non—
disabled peers. The placement at CCCD is not the LRE for the Student.

14. In order for the Student to receive a program that provided him with meaningful
educational beneﬁt, the Parents unilaterally placed him in the school the Board had funded
for the past two years. This placement, CCCD, although not the LRE, enabled the Student in
the interim to receive the educational beneﬁt that the Board’s program would not provide.
“[W]hen the public school fails to provide an appropriate IEP, tuition reimbursement may be
made to students placed in private schools that specialize in educating students with learning
disabilities, . .The least—restrictive environment requirement does not bar
reimbursement. . ,An appropriate private placement is not disqualiﬁed because it is a more
restrictive environment than that ofthe public placement. , ,the test for the parents‘ private
placement is that it is appropriate, and not that it is perfect. Warren G. v. Cumberland
Coung Sch. Dist., 190 F.3d 80, 84~86 (3d Cir. 1999). Whether the Parents are entitled to be
reimbursed for the costs of private placement turns on two distinct questions: whether the
challenged IEP was inadequate to provide the child with a FAPE and whether the private
educational services obtained by the Parents were appropriate to the child’s needs. Student
v. Greenwich B.O.E. CT DOE Case No. 06-005, (6/16/06) (citing M.C. v. Voluntown Bd.
of Ed., 226 F.3d 60, 66 (2d Cir. 2000). As previously stated the IEP for the 2010-2011

school year was not appropriate.

 

l5. T0 the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed
herein, the Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL ORDER AND DECISION:

1. The progTam offered by the Board for the 2010—201 1 school year is not appropriate.
2. The program at CCCD is not appropriate and does not provide the Student with a

FAPE in the LRE.
3. The extended school year program (ESY) offered by the Board for the summer 2010

was not appropriate and did not provide the Student with FAPE.
4. The transition plan offered by the Board is appropriate.
5. The functional behavioral analysis is appropriate and able to provide the Student with

an appropriate behavior intervention plan.
6. The Board shall be responsible for the payment ofthe December 2009 evaluation of

Dr Powers only, since the Board used that updated diagnosis to continue the

Student’s eligibility.
7. The Board shall convene a PPT within 2 weeks ofthe issuance 0fthe Final Decision

and order and the PPT shall:

14

June l4, 201 l Final Decision and Order l1-0040

8.

11.

Create a plan to transition the Student from CCCD t0 the Board’s SRP
program at the High Schools

b. The Board shall invite ﬁrst Dr Molteni, and ifhe is not available Dr. Powers,
to attend the PPT and assist in draﬁing a transition plan from CCCD to the
high school for the Student.

c, Once the Student is transitioned to the district‘s high school, the Student’s
behaviors need to be evaluated in the new setting.

d. The IEP ofthe Student may contain the lump sum of hours that the Student
shall receive in his related services but must also state how many hours of
services the Student will receive each week.

e. The IEP shall have a BCBA involved in the Student’s program for 10 hours
each week and continue with a para-professional who has received training in
applied behavioral analysis.

The Board shall reimburse the parent for their unilateral placement ofthe Student at
CCCD for the summer of2010 and the 2010—201 1 school year, The Board shall
continue funding the Student’s program at CCCD until the transition to the high
school is completed but no longer than 80 school days aﬂer the commencement ofthe
transition to the high school,

The Board is not required to purchase the Dynavox M3 as it has not been proven that
the Min Mo does not meet the Student‘s needs.

5”

. The Board shall not be responsible for funding the extended day program at CCCD as

this was not an issue that was agreed to as an issue for this hearing nor presented by
the Hearing Ofﬁcer at the commencement 0fthe hearing as an issue.

The Student is not entitled to compensatory education for the denial of FAPE for the
2010-2011 school years

l5

