February 24, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0278

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Pro .re, by the Father

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler
Law Department, Town of Greenwich
101 Field Point Rd.
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim,
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

 

Whether the behavior that has resulted in the pending disciplinary action was caused by,
or had a direct and substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability; or ifthe conduct in
question was the direct result 0fthe Board’s failure to implement the 1131’.

SUMMARY:

This Student, who was eligible for special education and related services under the primary
disability of Other Health Impairment due to his ADD, was facing disciplinary action due to the
alleged out of school action of operating a drug factory. A manifestation determination meeting
convened, and the Board staff agreed that the pending disciplinary action was not caused by and
did not have a direct and substantial relationship to the Student’s disability and the conduct in
question was not the direct result of the Board’s failure to implement the IEP. The Student
requested this hearing to challenge this conclusion.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student, through the Father, requested this hearing on January 14, 2011. A prehcaring
conference was held on January 25, and the hearing convened on February 11, 2011, within 20
school days of the filing of the request for hearing, taking into consideration school vacation
days and days when the Board’s schoo1s were closed due to inclement weather. The Student has
reached the age of majority, but submitted permission for his Father to represent him in the
meeting [sic] on February 11, 2011.

The Board failed to convene a resolution meeting in this matter, but the Father and Board‘s
attorney agreed on the record that they waived the meeting.

February 24, 201 I Final Decision and Order 1 1-0278

The Student’s witnesses were the Father and the Father’s Niece, who also served as a Spanish
language interpreter for the Fatheix

The Board’s witnesses were Joseph Russo, Board high school housemaster of Sheldon; Danielle
Polizzi, the Board social worker; Lindsey Pontieri, Board special education teacher and Mary
Forde, Director of Pupil Personnel Services.

The Board submitted 10 exhibits. The Student did not submit exhibits.

This case proceeded as an expedited hearing. The hearing date was convened within 20 school
days ofthe request for hearing and this decision is issued within 10 school days 0fthe closing of
the evidentiary hearing in accordance with 34 CFR §300.532(c).

To the extent that the procedural history, summary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
discussion/conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. v.

Callallen Independent School Board 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)

JURISIDICTION

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticul General Slalutes (“CGS”)
§10—76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §l415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (“UAPA”), CGS §§ 4—176e to 4—
178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is currently 18 years old and in twell‘th grade at the Board high school.
[Exhibit 3-5]

2. The Student is diagnosed with ADD, predominately inattentive type based on his long
history of being impulsive and inattentive in school. [Exhibit B-7] He is identiﬁed as
eligible for special education and related services with the primary disability of Other
Health Impairment. [Exhibit B—8]

3. The Student’s Individualized Education Program [IEP] for the 2010—11 school year was
planned at a Planning and Placement Team [PPT] meeting on February 3, 2010. The
Student at that time had not yet reached the age of majority. The Father was unable to
attend the PPT meeting in February 2010, but gave his permission for the PPT meeting to
be held without him. The Student attended the meeting. At the PPT meeting, the
Student’s program for the 2010—11 was planned to be 18 sessions per week of special
education and one half hour per week of counseling through the social worker. His goals
included (I) [the Student] will maintain the positive changes he has made in his behavior
and focus, (2) [the Student] will continue in working on his organizational skills on long
term assignments, (3) [the Student] will acquire the skills to successfully transition to a

February 24, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0278

10.

two year or four year university, (4) [the Student] will explore how his disability can
affect his ability to be inconsistent in school which may, in turn, affect ﬁltui'e
employment. [Exhibit B—8]

At the beginning of the 2010-11 school year, the Student’s schedule was changed to
primarily mainstream classes, but his IEP was not revised. Rather than having 18
sessions per week of speciai education, the Student was assigned 6 sessions per week, a
third ofthe sessions listed in his IEP. There was no PPT meeting convened to discuss this
change, nor was there an agreement to amend the IEP to this level of services.
[Testimony i-lousemaster, Director, Social Worker, Special Education Teacher]

On December 15, 2010, the Board Superintendent was notiﬁed that the Student had been
arrested by the Greenwich Police Department on the following charges: 21a-277(b) intent
to sell, 21a-279(c) possession] 0d (sic) marijuana, 21-279d possession within 1500’ of
daycare center, 21s-278a(B) possession within 1500’ of housing complex and 21a-240b
operating a drug factory. [Exhibit 3—2]

On December 20, 2010, the Board notified the Parents that the Student was placed on out
of schoo1 suspension for ten days for operating a drug factory, and that the Student may
be subject to further disciplinary action. [Exhibit B—l] '

The PPT convened on January 5, 201 1 to conduct a manifestation determination. The
IEP meeting summary notes that the housemaster, the Mother, the Father, the Student,
two regular education teachers, the special education teacher, the guidance counsel and
the family’s Niece attended this meeting. [Exhibit B-S] The social worker testiﬁed that
she also attended this meeting. [Testimony Social Worker]

The school based members of the team concluded that the Student’s disability was not
related to his misconduct. They also concluded that the IEP was being implemented as
discussed and written. [Exhibit BS]

The IEP document was not reviewed at this PPT meeting, and the Board staff failed to
notice that the Board had failed to implement the Student’s IEP for the entire 2010-1 1
school year. [Testimony Housemaster, Social Worker, Special Education Teacher,
Director]

This failure to review the IEP continued. At this hearing when the Student was
challenging the manifestation determination, the Board staffinitially testiﬁed that the IEP
was implemented These staff members were recalied as witnesses, returning to the
hearing room after the Board Director realized that the testimony was inaccurate. All
Board witnesses then conﬁrmed that the Board had indeed failed to implement the IEP as
written. [Testimony Director, Housemaster, Social Worker, Special Education Teacher]

. The Student’s conduct in question, which is the subject ofthe disciplinary action and the

manifestation determination, resulted in planning and purposeﬁil actions over a period of
time, as well as forethought. None ofthis relates to the Student’s disability of ADD and

 

February 24, 20l l Final Decision and Order 1 1-0278

the related impulsivity and inattentiveness. [Testimony Housemaster, Social Worker,
Special Education Teacher; Exhibits 8-2, 3-7]

12. The family members testiﬁed that the Student was under a great deal of stress due to
being mainstreamed in his courses. The Niece, who also served as the family’s Spanish
language interpreter, testiﬁed that the Student was very stressed and the way he was
coping with the stress was by smoking marijuana. She said hejustiﬁed the selling of
marijuana as this allowed him to smoke for free and alleviate his stress. He wasn’t
considering the consequences of his actions. [Testimony Niece, Father] The Student did
not present to the school staff as being under stress at school. [Testimony Housemaster]
No evidence was presented from the Student’s providers or other medical or
psychological professionals that the Student’s disability manifested as a failure to
consider the consequences ofhis actions.

13. The school members of the team concluded that the misconduct was not related to the
Student’s disability. [Testimony Housemaster, Social Worker, Special Education

Teacher]

14. The Student, through his father, brought this hearing request to challenge this
manifestation determination. [Exhibit H.O.—l]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of2004 [IDEA] provides
for services to children with disabilities. The Student has been found eligible for special
education services, and is afforded the protections of the Act and related regulations.

The IDEA provides that prior to the change of placement ofa child with a disability due

to violation of school rules, a manifestation determination must be completed. This provision

provides that:

“ . . .within 10 school days of any decision to change the placement ofa child
with a disability because ofa violation ofa code of student
conduct, the local educational agency, the parent, and
relevant members of the lEP Team (as determined by the parent
and the local educational agency) shall review all relevant
information in the student's ﬁle, including the child's IEP,
any teacher observations, and any relevant information
provided by the parents to determine —
(l) if the conduct in question was caused by, or had a

February 24, 2011 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0278

direct and substantial relationship to, the child‘s
disability; or

(11) if the conduct in question was the direct result of
the local educational agency‘s failure to implement the
IEP.” 20 U.S‘C. §1415

1fthe Board, Parents and the members ofthe 1EP team determine that either sub—clause is
applicable for the child, the conduct is determined to be a manifestation ofthe Student’s
disability. Id.

In this case, the Student’s behavior that has resulted in the pending disciplinary action
was not caused by, nor had a direct and substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability. The
purported claim of engaging in the behavior to pay for the stress relief of smoking the marijuana
was, even if found believable, not related to the Student’s disability. The Student’s actions were
made with aforethought and planning, and were not the disruptive behaviors characteristic of the
Student’s disability.

The Student’s 1EP was not appropriately implemented, and in this manifestation
determination meeting, that inquiry, i.e., whether the IEP was implemented, was not
appropriately completed.

The Board merely conducted a cursory review of the Student’s IEP at this manifestatioh
determination meeting. The manifestation determination meeting serves an important purpose.
11 is not a rubber stamp ofthe disciplinary action taken by the Board. It must be a good faith
inquiry into whether the behavior directly related to the Student’s disability and whether it
directiy related to the failure to implement his 1E1), That did not occur in this case. The
Housemaster testiﬁed that they didn’t go through the whole IEP, “we referenced it,” testifying

that people were aware of the contents although they didn’t go through every page and

concluding, inaccurately, that the IEP was Fully implemented.

February 24, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 l—0278

lt‘an appropriate review ofthe lEP were undertaken the Board would have been aware
that the Student was receiving only a third ofthe services which were provided in his IEP at the
time of the manifestation determination. The Board failed to even do the requisite minimum
inquiry as they did not know the contents ot‘the Student’s IEP but concluded that it was
implemented.

While there was an egregious failure to implement the IEP and appropriately conduct the
manifestation determination review, the complete inquiry in accordance with the regulations
must include a determination of a causal connection, to wit, whether the conduct in question was
the direct result ofthe Board’s failure to implement the IEP. Based on all evidence presented,
it cannot be concluded that the conduct was a direct result ofthe admitted failure to implement
the [ER The Student’s disability was manifested by inattentiveness and impulsivity. The
Student did not receive the educational benefit outlined in his IEP, but the conduct ofrunning a
drug factory was not the direct result of the failure of the Board to provide special education
services to the Student.

The review of the conduct in question and the Student’s disability necessitates the ﬁnding
that the behavior that has resulted in the pending disciplinary action was not caused by, nor had a
direct and substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability; and the conduct in question was
not the direct result ofthe Board’s failure to implement the IEP. Based on the evidence
presented, however, it is imperative that the state Department of Education review this matter
and take corrective actions as necessary. The state Depaitment of Education is directed to
review this matter and institute corrective measures for the Board’s failure to convene a

resolution meeting, for the failure to conduct an appropriate manifestation determination meeting

February 24, 201 1 Final Decision and Order | 1—0278

including the failure to review the IEP during the meeting, and for the Board’s failure to provide

the Student with the services outlined in his IEP.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The behavior that has resulted in the pending disciplinary action was not caused by, and
did not have a direct and substantial relationship to, the Student‘s disability.

2. The conduct in question was not the direct resuit ofthe Board’s failure to implement the
IEP,

3. Due to the failures of the Board to convene a resolution meeting, conduct an appropriate
manifestation determination meeting and to provide the Student with the services
outlined in his IEP, the state Department of Education shall review these actions and take
the appropriate corrective actions to address these failures.

