September 1, 2010                                                  1                                                 Final Deci
sion and Order 11-0063 
 STATE OF CONNECTICUT 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    
Student v. Norwalk Board of Education 
    Appearing on behalf of the Student:  
Pro se  
Appearing on behalf of the Board:
  Attorney Marsha Belman Moses 
Berchem, Moses and Devlin 
75 Broad Street 

Milford, CT  06460 
 
Appearing before:     Attorney Mary
 Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Officer 
  FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 
  SUMMARY:  The Board received this request for hearing on July 26, 2010 
and the Board&#8482;s attorney file
d a sufficiency challenge to 
the complaint. 

 
 A Notice was issued regarding the suffi
ciency challenge which found that the Parents&#8482; request for hearing did not 
meet the notice requirements for a request for hearing.  Th
e Notice stated that the requesting party may not have a 
hearing until a notice is filed that meets the requirements fo
r a request for hearing.  It stated that the following information was missing from the original request:  

  a description of the nature of the problem of the 
child relating to such proposed initiation or change, 
including facts relating to such problem   a proposed resolution of the problem to the extent 
known and available to the requesting party at the 
time. 
 
By this notice, the Parents were informed that [i]
f an amended hearing request is not received on or before 
Friday, August 27, 2010, the hearing
 will be dismissed for failure to prosecute. 
 A prehearing conference convened on August 13, 2010.  The Pa
rents and the Board&#8482;s attorney were present at this 
teleconference.  During this teleconference, the sufficien
cy challenge was discussed, and the Parents were given 
further notification that if an amended hearing requ
est was not submitted, the case would be dismissed. The Parents have not submitted an amended hearing request
.  Therefore, in accordance with the Notice Regarding Sufficiency Challenge, this hearing request is dismissed without prejudice.   
 FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:
  The matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice
.   
 
 