May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0212

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Stamford Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: The Parents, pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christopher Tracey
Attorney Andreana Bellach
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
300 Atlantic Street
Stamford, CT 06901

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2010-11 school year was
appropriate;

2. Whether the Board’s actions during the 2010-11 school year as outlined in the request for
hearing constituted procedural Violations which resulted in a denial of a free appropriate
public education [FAPE] to the Student;

3. Whether the Parent’s program, including all related services provided to the Student,
during the 2010-1 1 school year is appropriate and shall be reimbursed;

4‘ Whether the Parent’s proposed placement of the Student at the McCarton School is

appropriate.
SUMMARY:

The 12—year—old Student, who is identiﬁed as eligible for special education and related
services under the category of autism, is currently receiving services at home from therapists
provided by the Parents. At the beginning of the 2010-11 school year, the Board offered the
Student a program at the Board school which met all components recommended by three
independent evaluators The Parents rejected the program and requested this hearing seeking
reimbursement for their home program and placement of the Student at the McCarton School.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board received this request for hearing dated November 18, 2010 [Exhibit H.O.—1]
on November 22, 2010 and a prehearing conference convened on December 2, 2010. The
resolution session convened on December 6, 2010.

 

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0212

The Board submitted a Motion to Dismiss, in Part, the Parents” Due Process Request and
a Motion to Strike, in Part, the Parents’ Due Process Request.

The Board’s Motion to Dismiss the issue of the Board’s compliance with a Settlement
Agreement, which was pending as Issue Number 1 in this case as set forth in the Notice of
Hearing dated December 2, 2010, was granted

This issue number 1, “whether the Board complied with the settlement agreement during
the 2009-10 school year,” did not concern the identiﬁcation, evaluation or educational placement
of the child, or the provision of a free appropriate public education to such child. 20 USC §
1415(b)(6)(A). Rather it seeks a determination of a contractual issue, to wit, whether the Board
has complied with the settlement agreement. A due process hearing is not the proper vehicle to
enforce or determine compliance with a settlement agreement. H.C. v. Coulton-Pierreponr
Central School District, 52 IDELR 278, 341 F. App’x 687 (2"[1 Cir. 2009). Therefore, Issue
Number 1 was dismissed, and the pending issues were renumbered and are set forth as the issues

to be decided in this case.

The Board’s Motion to Strike the Due Process Request as it contains inaccurate or
inappropriate factual allegations was denied on the record, as the allegations set forth in the
“Demand for Due Process” dated November 18, 2010 were considered allegations only, akin to
pleadings, and therefore those allegations were not stricken.

The Parents requested that the hearing be open to the public, and the hearing convened on
twelve hearing dates in January, February and March 2011.

The Parents requested that an Albanian foreign language interpreter be present at the
hearing dates convened. On one hearing date, the interpreter was not present due a scheduling
error by the interpreter service company and/or its interpreter, but the Parents requested that the
hearing go forward as scheduled. During that day a Board staff member was present who served
as an interpreter to the satisfaction of the Parents. The interpreter’s role changed from day to
day and even within the same day of the hearing. At times the Parents decided that they would
request translation of all spoken words and, at other times, decided that they did not need any
translation whatsoever. The intelpretation of the proceedings was completed in response to all of

the Parents’ requests.

Requests for extension of the mailing date were granted at the Board’s request so that
additional hearing dates could be scheduled and so that the parties could ﬁle written closing
arguments. Written closing arguments were ﬁled by both parties on March 16, 2011. Additional
submissions were emailed by the Board’s attorney on March 25, 2011 and by the Parents on
March 28, 2011. A request for extension of the mailing date, submitted by the Board’s attorney
on April 1, 2011 because the transcripts were not completed by the reporting service, was
granted. The mailing date of the decision was extended to May 13, 201 l.

The Parents’ witnesses were the Mother; Wa yne Holland, Board director of special
education; Karen Simon, Parents’ advocate; Lucinda Ribeiro, the Student’s home therapist and
Marilena Baldino, the Student’s home therapist. The Parents also called Carol Fiorile, the

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0212

consultant for their home program, as a witness, but failed to have her return as a witness to
complete her testimony. The Parents were provided ample and frequent notice during the
hearing that the failure to have the witness return to complete cross examination would result in
the striking of her testimony. The witness failed to return. Therefore, Ms. Fiorile’s testimony

was stricken.

The Board’s witnesses were Dr. Robin Nuzzolo, the Parents-selected independent
evaluator; and Wayne Holland, Board director of special education.

The Parents submitted exhibits numbered P-l through P-73, as well as an unnumbered
box of cassette tapes. The Board’s objections to the following exhibits were sustained, and the
following exhibits were not admitted into evidence: Exhibits P~1, P—2, P-3, P-29 - Page 12, P—35,
P—37, P—47, P-52, P-67, P-72, P-73— pages 2-81 and the unnumbered box of cassette tapes.1

The Board submitted exhibits numbered B~1 through B-60, which were admitted into
evidence.

A11 exhibits, transcripts and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and
given their due consideration in this decision.

To the extent that the comments, proceduraI history, summary and ﬁndings of fact
actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. Bonnie Am
F. V. Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)

COMMENTS ON THE CONDUCT OF THE PROCEEDINGS:

Pursuant to Section 10-76h-16(b) of the Regulations, the Hearing Ofﬁcer may comment
about the conduct of the parties in a hearing. Such cements are necessary in this case.

It is not uncommon in special education due process hearings to have an elevated
emotionality present. When parents represent themselves during the hearings, it can be
challenging for the family to contain their emotions — their frustration, sadness or anger. The
actions of the Parents in this case, however, far exceeded the typical difﬁculty that some parents
have in comporting themselves to the structure of the hearing proceedings and containing
emotions during a hearing about their child who has a disability.

Due to the rancor and disrespectful behavior of the Parents, usually due to the actions of
the Father, several times during the hearing the Hearing Ofﬁcer quoted the regulation which
provides the Hearing Ofﬁcer authority to take reasonable measures to ensure that the hearing
proceeds in a civil manner. This regulation provision provides that “[t]he hearing ofﬁcer shall
take reasonable measures, including the exclusion ﬁ‘om the hearing of parties. counsel, or any

' The box of cassette tapes had been submitted by the Parents unnumbered. On the record, the box of tapes was
identiﬁed as proposed exhibit P-71. Subsequent to this, the Parents submitted another group of documents which
was identiﬁed as exhibit P-71. To avoid confusion, the box oftapes has been identiﬁed as an unnumbered proposed

exhibit in this decision.

 

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11«0212

other participant, to ensure that the parties, counsel and all other participants comport
themselves civilly and that the hearing is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. Behavior
which may result in exclusion includes, but is not limited to, abusive speech, inﬂammatory
remarks or disrespectful conduct towards the hearing ofﬁcer, counsel or any party or party
representative, or witnesses. ” Regs. Conn, State Agencies §10-76h-13(a) The reference on the
record to this regulatory authority was provided to warn the Parents, particularly the Father, to
cease the inappropriate and disrespectful conduct. Even with these warnings, the conduct
continued, and further action was necessary to ensure that the hearing was conducted in a fair
and orderly manner. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was patient and tolerant of the Parents’ conduct, yet
the disrespectful and disruptive conduct continued and escalated throughout the course of the

hearing.

During the hearing, the Parents were reminded that they would be given reasonably
sufﬁcient time to present their evidence. The Parents had estimated that they would require two
days to present their case. The Parents rested their case at the end of the eleventh hearing date,
although they were informed by the Hearing Ofﬁcer that they would be provided additional time
if necessary to have additional witnesses testify. The Parents’ claim that they didn’t have
sufﬁcient hearing time to present their case or were required to complete their case prematurely
is without merit and absolutely contrary to the record.

Despite the reminders and the latitude and leeway afforded to the Parents, rancor and
disrespectful and inappropriate behavior was demonstrated by the Parents throughout the hearing
dates. The Parents conducted themselves inappropriately throughout the hearing, causing undue
delays in the hearing and creating a hostile environment This inappropriate behavior was
directed at the Hearing Ofﬁcer, representatives of the Board and witnesses of the Board.

The Parents had blatant disregard and abject disrespect for the hearing process, including
frequent disregard of even simple orders. The Parents, particularly the Father, would also talk
back to the Hearing Ofﬁcer when rulings were made, and respond in a loud, aggressive tone,
persistently interrupting the hearing proceedings with comments, complaints and disagreements.
The Parents exhibited belligerent and hostile behavior and manner towards the Hearing Ofﬁcer,
and the Board’s representatives and witnesses. This behavior required the Hearing Ofﬁcer to
conclude the hearing early on two hearing dates and to remove the Father from the hearing room
several times due to his inability to control his behavior despite repeated warnings that he would
be removed due to his behavior if it continued. The Board’s attorney also reported that the
Board felt it was necessary to have a uniformed ofﬁcer of the Stamford Police Department
present to maintain the safety of those attending the hearing and present in the Government
Center building after the hearing date on January 24, 2011. Police were present at all hearing
dates following January 24, 2011. The Father also attempted to surreptitiously tape record the
hearing in violation of a clear, direct order from the Hearing Ofﬁcer.

Even with the presence of a police ofﬁcer, the Father would delay or refuse to leave the
hearing room when ordered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer due to his hostile, intimidating and/or
disruptive behavior, which would necessitate intervention from the Stamford Police Department
to ensure exit from the hearing room.

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0212

The Father engaged in intimidation of a disinterested witness by demanding her home
address after the witness expressed grave concerns for her physical safety based on alleged
violent, threatening cements made by friends of the Parents on the eleventh day of the hearing
(persons who had not attended any prior hearing date and who observed for just ten minutes at
the start of the hearing date before leaving the hearing room and making the alleged remarks near
the witness in the hallway outside the hearing room).2 After this occurred, the Parents
outrageously accused, without any basis in fact or logic, that the Board, the disinterested witness
and the Hearing Ofﬁcer fabricated the fear expressed by the disinterested witness.

Further, the Parents raised claims of discrimination against them on the basis of their
national origin in their due process complaint and throughout the hearing. These claims of
discrimination were asserted during the hearing against the Board and the Hearing Ofﬁcer, For
example, such claims were raised when the Board’s attorney objected to the presentation of
evidence and/or the Parents’ behavior during the hearing. The Parents even raised claims of
discrimination on behalf of their three friends who had to be banned from the building after they
allegedly made violent threats against those in the hearing room, and the Parents charged that
these threats were fabricated because they are Albanians. The Parents defended these individuals
and alleged discrimination, even though the Parents were not present to hear the remarks made
by their friends. There is no evidence whatsoever of discrimination against the Parents or the
Student in this matter. The evidence actually demonstrates the converse. From what was
evident during the course of this hearing, the Board has continuously worked in good faith and
treated the Parents and the Student with respect, despite the Parents’ hostile, dismissive and
degrading treatment of the Board, its staff and its representatives. The Record also clearly
demonstrates that the Parents were treated with respect by the Hearing Ofﬁcer, who granted the
Parents appropriate and extensive leeway in the presentation of their case, despite the Parents’
continuous dismissive and disrespectﬁil behavior towards the Hearing Ofﬁcer.

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(“CGS”) §10—76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §l415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedures Act (“UAPA”),
CGS §§ 4—176e t0 4-178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4‘186.

FINDINGS OF FACTS:

1. The Student is 12 years old and is currently receiving educational services at home from
the therapists provided by the Parents. [Testimony Ms. Ribeiro, Mother]

2 On this same day, in light of the alleged threatening remarks, the Hearing Ofﬁcer stopped the proceedings to
ensure that the three men who had made these alleged threats had exited the Government Center building, which
was veriﬁed by the security cameras. Due to the legitimate concerns for the safety ofthose in the hearing room, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer requested that the police ofﬁcer escort alt persons to the parking garage attached to the Government
Center to ensure that the parties, Board representatives, counsel, court reporter, Hearing Ofﬁcer and interpreter at
the hearing could safely exit the premises on that hearing date.

5

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0212

10.

It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services
under the category of Autism.

The Student has been receiving his education at home for the past three to four years,
initially in accordance with settlement agreements with the Board and now funded by the
Parents. His current Parents-funded program is one to one service provided in the
Student’s bedroom [Testimony Board director, Dr. Nuzzolo]

In November 2009, the Board and Parents entered into a settlement agreement which set
forth a plan to have consultants evaluate the Student and recommend a program for the
Student, which the Board agreed to fund. The Board entered into this agreement as a
way to build its relationship with the Parents. [Testimony Dr. Holland, Exhibit P~7] As
this is a conﬁdential settlement agreement, only the particulars that relate to this pending
case will be addressed in this decision.

In accordance with the agreement, the parties agreed to have Bridget Taylor conduct a
psychological and educational evaluation of the Student. In the event that Ms. Taylor
was unavailable, the Parents agreed to submit to the Board a list of five consultants with
qualiﬁcations and experience, including experience transitioning students with autism to
their public schools, and the Board would select one of the evaluators from the Parents’
list of five qualiﬁed evaluators to complete the evaluation. [Exhibit P—7]

The Parents and Board also agreed that the Board would retain the Center for Special
Needs to conduct a speech and language evaluation and occupational therapy [OT]
evaluation of the Student. [Exhibit P-7]

During the pendency of the evaluations and through the development of the Student’s
Individualized Educational Program [IEP], the Board funded the Student’s home-based
program in accordance with this agreement. [Testimony Board director, Exhibit P-7]

Bridget Taylor sent an email that she would be unable to complete the evaluation, and
subsequently the Parents submitted their list of ﬁve evaluators to the Board. Dr. Robin
Nuzzolo, one of the Parents’ requested evaluators who had been recommended by the
Parents’ consultant, conﬁrmed that she could complete the evaluation during the
appropriate timeframe, [Testimony Board director, Dr. Nuzzolo; Exhibit P-9]

Arrangements were made by the Board to have the Student evaluated by the speech and
OT evaluators by the Center for Special Needs, in accordance with the agreement.

[Exhibit P—9]

The Parents subsequently refused to have the Student evaluated by the speech and OT
evaluators at the Center for Children with Special Needs as set forth in the settlement
agreement, as they refused to drive the approximately 75 mile distance to the evaluation
They cancelled a speech evaluation which was scheduled for December, and refused the
January 11, 2010 OT evaluations [Exhibit P‘9] Subsequently, the speech evaluation was

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1~0212

11.

12.

13.

141

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

completed by Katie Curra and the occupational therapy evaluation was completed by
Kristin Carbine. [Exhibits P—18, P~19]

The Parents scheduled the Student’s OT evaluation for January 15, 2010, the tentative
date for the reconvening of the PPT. The Board agreed to await completion of the
evaluation to convene the PPT meeting. [Exhibit P-l 1]

The Parents notiﬁed the Board on January 24, 2010 that the last evaluation was
completed, and the Board sent out a Notice on January 29, 2010 scheduling a Flaming
and Placement Team [PPT] meeting on February 24, 2010, [Exhibit P-13, P~14]

Throughout this time, the Board made many attempts to convene the PPT meeting to plan
the program, but was unable to do so due to cancellations by the Parents and the
scheduling conﬂicts of others such as the Parents-selected independent evaluator that the
Parents deemed necessary to be at the meetings. The details of these cancellations are
included here to outline the reasonable steps taken by the Board to convene the PPT
meetings and proceed with the planning of the IEP for the Student. [Testimony Board
director, Dr. Nuzzolo; Exhibits P-l4, P—IS, P.17, P-25, P-28, P-29, P-33, P-39, P—55]

On February 1, 2010 the Mother sent an email to the Board director that she was not
available on February 24, 2010 and requested rescheduling the meeting. [Exhibit P—14]

A March 18, 2010 PPT meeting date was scheduled on February 4, 2010 in accordance
with the Parents’ request [Exhibit P—IS], but due to the unavailability of Dr. Nuzzolo, the
PPT meeting was rescheduled to March 31, 2010. [Exhibit P-l7, P—IS]

The Parents requested a second observation by the evaluator, which was completed by
Dr. Nuzzolo on February 17, 2010. [Testimony Dr. Nuzzolo, Exhibit P—26]

On March 30, 2010 the Mother notiﬁed the Board that she had received an email from
Dr. Nuzzolo, one of her son’s “main evaluators,” who told her that she had a personal
emergency and would not be able to attend the Student’s PPT meeting scheduled for the
next day. The Mother requested that the PPT be postponed to a date in April. [Exhibit P—

25]

In response to this request from the Mother, the Board director responded by email,
stating that he strongly suggested that they not cancel the meeting, but rather that they
hold the PPT meeting and schedule a second meeting to complete reviewing the reports
as well as the IEP. The Parents then agreed Via email to participate in the PPT meeting
on March 31, 2010. [Exhibit P-25]

On March 31, 2010, minutes before the PPT meeting was to be convened, the Board
learned that the regular education teacher would be unab1e to attend the PPT meeting
scheduled for March 31. The Parents refused to go forward without the regular education
teacher present and that PPT meeting was cancelled. [Testimony Board director, Exhibit

P~28]

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0212

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Again the Board attempted to reschedule the PPT meeting, proposing several days, and
attempting to schedule a PPT meeting on a date requested by the Parents, May 17, 2010.
When contacted about the Parents’ requested date of May 17, the Parents suggested May
18, 2010. During this time, the Parents were refusing to allow the Board staff to observe
the Student’s home program, despite the agreement which required that the Parents allow
such observation. [Exhibits P~7, P-29]

The Parents requested an earlier PPT meeting, but also requested that the director of
special education attend the meeting. When the director suggested that he step down
from chairing the meeting and ask the staff to schedule an earlier PPT meeting, the
Mother stated via email that the Parents want him to be present, because they didn’t want
him to “give the same answer to the Hearing Ofﬁcer like you did in our previous

hearing.” [Exhibit P-29]

During this time, the Parents had already determined that they were going to file a request
for hearing. [Testimony Mother, Exhibit P—29]

The PPT meeting convened on May 18, 2010 and reconvened on May 24, 2010. A
substantial amount of time was devoted at both meetings to developing the Student’s IEP,
but the meeting was adjourned to be continued on June 18, 2010 as the consultants who
had been there a substantial amount of time were not available after 2 pm. [Exhibit P—33]

Subsequent to the scheduling of the follow-up PPT meeting, Dr. Nuzzolo contacted the
Board and apologized that she was unable to attend the meeting, as her school was having
graduation on that day, but suggested June 25, 2010 as a follow—up date. [Testimony Dr.

Nuzzolo, Exhibit P-41]

The Board attempted to reschedule the PPT meeting for several days, but the Parents
continued to state they were unavailable for the dates. [Exhibits P-44, P-45]

The Board was proceeding with the PPT meeting as it was imperative that they have a
program to offer to the Student for the beginning of the 2010-11 school year. [Testimony
Board director]

The Board convened a PPT meeting on July 12, 2010. The Parents did not attend this
meeting. The OT and speech consultants presented their recommendations for program
for the Student, and the PPT scheduled to reconvene on August 13, 2010. [Exhibit B-3 9]

The Board had attempted to have the Parents available by phone, or even through Skype,
but the Parents did not provide the Board with contact information. At this time, the
Parents reported they were out of country. [Testimony Board director] The Father
returned to Stamford on July 14 or 15, 2010. [Testimony Mother]

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0212

29.

30‘

311

32.

33‘

34.

While the Parents were not present at the August 13, 2010 PPT meeting, the Father was
in Stamford and was available to attend the PPT meeting, a notice of which had been sent
to the Parents on or about July 13, 2010‘ [Testimony Mother, Board director]

Dr. Nuzzolo, the independent evaluator, was unable to attend the August PPT meeting as
she had a family emergency that could not be avoided. She submitted her
recommendations for the Student’s program prior to the PPT meeting. [Testimony Dr.
Nuzzolo, Exhibit P-54]

The independent evaluator, Dr. Nuzzolo, recommended "a small structured classroom in
a building with opportunities to integrate into a classroom with typical peers.” The IEP
afforded the Student with appropriate self—contained and general education opportunities
in a school attended by typical peers. The IEP provided that the Student would receive
20 hours of time spent with nondisabled peers and 10 hours of small group instruction, in
addition to his pullout services for occupational therapy and services from the speech and
language pathologist. [Exhibits P-10, P—55]

Dr. Nuzzolo also recommended the following components for a program for the Student
for the 2010-1 1 school year:
0 A transition plan for the Student to attend a center based program, with a fade in
for the first 30 days.
0 A center based program was described by the evaluator as a program in a school,
as opposed to a home based program,
0 The Student would require a 1:1 aide with him, which could be re-assessed after
the ﬁrst half of the school year.
c A qualiﬁed behavior analyst would need to work with the classroom teacher,
teaching assistants and 1:1 aide for at least four hours per week for the ﬁrst 30
days of school, which time could be reassessed. The Student would require a
behavior plan.
0 A parent educator was advised to serve as liaison between the school program and
the family.
[Testimony Dr. Nuzzolo, Exhibits P—10, P-54, P-55]

The independent occupational therapy evaluator, Kristin Downer (nee Carbine),
identiﬁed the Student’s visual motor and graphomotor needs. The IEP includes goals
addressing both of these need areas. She recommended that the Student receive
occupational therapy. The IEP includes three occupational therapy sessions weekly‘
[Exhibits P-19, P-SS]

The independent speech and language evaluator, Katie Curra, recommended auditory
processing and word retrieval goals and objectives, each of which are included in the IEP.
She also recommended both speech and language therapy and an interdisciplinary
approach that incorporated therapeutic concepts into the Student’s entire program. The
IEP includes consultation with a speech language therapist. The IEP also included two
speech and language therapy sessions per week, one in the classroom and the other

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0212

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

conducted individually with a member of the Student’s teaching team present. [Exhibits
P-18, P-55]

The PPT convened on August 13, 2010 and the Student’s IEP for the 2010-1 1 school year
was ﬁnalized. The program designed for the Student met all the components of the
Student’s program as identiﬁed by the evaluators selected in accordance with the
settlement agreement. [Exhibit P-SS]

The Board’s proposed IEP for the Student for the 2010-11 school year included
appropriate goals and objectives to address the Student’s concerns and needs as outlined
in his present levels of academic achievement and functional performance. The goals
included: (1) the Student will demonstrate an improvement in word recognition and
decoding skills necessary to read for information and understanding; (2) the Student will
demonstrate an improvement in the mechanics of written language such as spelling,
capitalization and punctuation necessary to write for information, understanding and
written expression; (3) the Student will use numbers to count, measure, compare, order,
scale, locate and label, and use a variety of numerical representations to present, interpret,
communicate and connect various kinds of numerical information; (4) the Student will
develop the prosocial skills needed to interact appropriately with his peers; (5) the
Student will demonstrate an improvement in language skills necessary to speak and listen
for information, understanding, expression and social interaction; (6) the Student will
demonstrate an improvement in graphomotor skills for increased performance in the
educational setting; (7) the Student will demonstrate improved Visual-motor skills for
increased performance in the educational setting; (8) the Student will demonstrate an
improvement in sensory processing skills to successfully participate in educational and
classroom activities; (9) the Student will demonstrate an improvement in the critical
activities required for self help; (10) the Student will increase his functional math skills
for increased performance in the educational setting. These goals all addressed the
Student’s weaknesses and had appropriate objectives linked to achieving these

appropriate goals. [Exhibit P-55]

The IEP also included the appropriate related services, accommodations and
modiﬁcations to allow the Student to progress appropriately in the least restrictive
environment. The independent SLP consultant suggested placement for the Student at the
Board’s Roxbury School, as he would have the special education supports readily
available to him, and the placement at that location would provide his program with the
appropriate ﬂexibility. All members of the team who were present at the PPT meeting
agreed with this recommendation. The team discussed a transition plan to transition the
Student into his program at the Board school. [Exhibit B-55]

On August 24, the Parents sent a correspondence to the Board in which they rejected the
IEP and alleged that “stay put” was the current home program where the student is
receiving a one to one program at his home in his bedroom. [Exhibit P-56]

While the Board had funded the home program through June, it no longer funded the
Student’s home program, as the home program was funded pursuant to an expired

10

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0212

40‘

41.

42‘

43.

settlement agreement. By this time, the Board had offered the Student an lEP for the
2010-1 1 school year which met all requirements outlined by the independent evaluators.
[Testimony Board director]

Based on this letter, the Board attempted to schedule another PPT meeting, but the Parent
then requested that the Board director meet outside the PPT process to attempt to resolve
the matter. [Testimony Board director, Mother; Exhibit P-57]

Pursuant to the Parents’ request, the Board sent the Student’s records to the McCarton
School; Eastchestera, a public school in New York; Eagle Hill Greenwich and Ardsley, a

public school in New York. [Exhibit 8—58]

The PPT re-Convened on November 22, 2010. At that meeting, the Parents requested
placement of the Student at the McCarton School in New York. The Board denied this

request. [Exhibit P-65]

The Student continues to receive his education at his home program, which consists of
one to one sewices in his bedroom. His lead home therapist testiﬁed that the Student is
regressing in this program. [Testimony Ms. Ribeiro, Mother]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Parents brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities

Education Act [IDEA] which provides for special education and related services to children with

disabilities, from birth through age 21. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive a
free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) with special education and related services

under the disability category of autism pursuant to state and federal laws. $5; Conn. Gen. Stat.

§§ 10—76 et. seq‘; the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.SiC. § 1401, et

seq.

3 At the resolution session, the Board offered the Parents placement 0fthe Student at Eastchester, which the Parents
rejected, [Testimony Board director] The placement at Eastchester, a public school in New York, mirrors the
program the Board offered to the Student for the 2010-1 1 school year in its own school, [Testimony Board director]
Eastchester was not requested in this hearing, and placement at this school is not considered as it was not requested
by the Parent in their Demand for Due Process. Several times the Mother indicated on the record that she would
accept placement at Eastchester. The parties were invited to take time to discuss their position on the placement at
Eastchester outside the hearing room The Hearing Ofﬁcer did not take part in any ofthese discussions, nor did the
Hearing Ofﬁcer encourage or discourage either party to settle for this placement as such involvement in settlement

discussions would be improper.

11

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0212

The standard for determining whether a FAPE has been provided is set forth in Board of
Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982), The
two—pronged inquiry set forth in mm asks ﬁrst whether the procedural requirements of IDEA
have been reasonably met and, second, whether the IEP is “reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational benefits.” Q at 206-207

Despite the Parents’ claims that there is a laundry list of extensive procedural Violations
included in their 15 page single-spaeed request for hearing, the Board has fully complied with
the procedural requirements of the IDEA.

The Parents complain of a number of categories of procedural violations, including
violations regarding the timing of the PPT meetings, the notice of the PPT meetings, the extent
of review and consideration of a1] information/assessments during the PPT meetings and alleged
“predetermination” of the Board’s proposed program, the lack of certain parties in attendance at
the PPT meetings, alleged failure to allow for meaningful participation of the Parents and their
providers during the PPT meetings, the scheduling of the PPT meeting during the summer 2010,
the provision of copies of the IEP and other documents and assessments to the Parents, the scope
of the assessments completed in accordance with the settlement agreement, alleged falsiﬁcation
of documents by the Board and that the Board allegedly discriminated against the Parents and
caused them emotional distress.

Nothing in the record supports the conclusion that there were any procedural violations
which resulted in a denial of FAPE to the Student.

Despite their claims to the contrary, the Parents were active participants in the PPT
process. Though the Parents claim that they were not allowed to speak at PPT meetings, this

claim is not credible. The Parents actively participated in PPT meetings. The private providers

12

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0212

were also allowed to provide input to the PPT The Parents had numerous opportunities to
provide input to the PPT, which input was considered and, in some cases, adopted by the PPT.
Additionally, the Board offered the opportunity to participate in meetings via phone or other
electronic means after the Parents left the country during the summer 2010, The Parents did not
avail themselves of these opportunities.

The Parents presented no credible evidence to support their allegations of procedural
violations. The Parents complained of the timing of the PPT meetings, but it was the Parents and
the Parents—selected consultant who caused or requested the delays. The evidence supports the
conclusion that the Board provided timely notice of a1] PPT meetings. The Parents also
attempted to support their claim of predetermination by referencing appropriately developed
draft IEPs (which the Parents contemporaneously acknowledged were drafts). These draﬁs were
signiﬁcantly revised before the IEP was completed. [Exhibits P-31, P-55] Further, the Parents
claimed that the Board had predetermined the placement at Roxbury School, although it was Ms
Curra, an independent evaluator, who was the ﬁrst to recommend a placement at Roxbury
School, [Exhibit P—55]

The Parents also consistently alleged, without factual support, that the Board and the PPT
did not “consider” their input. As discussed above, the Record establishes that the Parents
provided substantial input to the PPT. Consideration of the Parents’ requests and input,
however, does not necessitate accepting or agreeing with those suggestions. E A.E. v. Westport
Bd. of Educ., 463 F, Supp.2d 208, 46 IDELR 277 (D. Conn. 2006)

Procedural ﬂaws do not automatically require a ﬁnding of a denial of a FAPE. Matrejek
v. Brewster Cent. Sch. Dist, 471 F Supp. 2d 415, 419, 47 IDELR 70 (S.D.N.Y. 2007) “Only

procedural inadequacies that cause substantive harm to the child or his parents -- meaning that

13

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0212

they individually or cumulatively result in the loss of educational opportunity or seriously
infringe on a parent’s participation in the creation or formulation of the IEP -- constitute a denial
ofa FAPE.” Matrejek, 471 F. Supp. 2d at 419. It can be found that child did not receive a FAPE
only if procedural inadequacies: (i) impeded the child's right to a FAPE; (ii) signiﬁcantly
impeded the parents’ opportunity to participate in the decision making process regarding the
provision ofa FAPE; or (iii) caused a deprivation of educational beneﬁts. 20 U.S.C.
1415(t)(3)(E)(ii). The Board offered the Student an appropriate educational opportunity, there
was no deprivation of educational beneﬁts and the Parents were provided a meaningful
opportunity to participate in the development of the IEP.

The Board complied with the procedural requirements of the IDEA when developing an
IEP for the Student that was reasonably calculated to enable the Student to receive meaningful -—
and certainly more than trivial -- educational beneﬁt. S_ee4 Rwy, 458 US. at 206~07. The IEP
document contains all of the required elements. Speciﬁcally, the IEP for 2010-2011 includes 1)
a statement of the Student’s present levels of educational performance; 2) annual goals and short-
term objectives based on those present levels; 3) the speciﬁc educational services to be provided;
4) an explanation of the extent to which the Student would not participate in regular education
programs; 5) any appropriate transition sewices; 6) objective criteria and evaluation procedures
for determining whether objectives are being met; and 7) the proposed initiation date and
duration ofproposed services. [Exhibit P-SS] ﬁg 34 C.F.R. Section 300.347; m, 142 F.3d
at 122; galﬂ Regs. Conn. State Agencies § 10-76d—1 1.

The PPT developed the IEP in accordance with the applicable legal standards. The
evidence demonstrates the Board developed a program that was “individualized on the basis of

the student’s assessment and performance.” S_ee A.S. v. Board of Education of West Hartford,

14

 

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0212

35 IDELR 179 (D. Conn. 2001), M 47 Fed. Appx. 615 (2d Cir. 2002) When developing the
IEP, the PPT met its obligations under the law by considering, among other things, the strengths
of the Student, the concerns of the Parents, the results of evaluations, and the academic,
developmental, and communication and functional needs of the Student. & 34 CPR. §
300.324. More speciﬁcally, the IEP is based on the results of three independent evaluations
conducted by agreed-upon evaluators. The IEP is closely 1inked to these comprehensive
evaluations of the Student’s needs. The IEP is thus based on the extensive information about the
Student’s needs available to the PPT. Signiﬁcantly, each of the independent evaluators
supported the IEP developed by the PPT as well as its implementation at Roxbury School.
Further, the Board provided adequate notice of all PPT meetings and invited appropriate
individuals to each meeting‘ The Board provided the Parents their procedural safeguards. Aﬁer
each PPT meeting, the Board sent the Parents prior written notice pages and, where appropriate,
additional documentation — including notes, tapes and transcripts of PPT meetings held in July
and August 2010. [Exhibit P-55] Accordingly, the central procedural protections of the IDEA
were followed by the Board, and no violation of the requirement to provide a FAPE can be
found.

As for the procedural violation claims by the Parents of discrimination and emotional
distress and falsiﬁcation of documents, nothing in the record supports these baseless and
outrageous allegations.

The second prong 0f Rowley is the determination of whether the Board offered the
Student an appropriate IEP. The proper gauge for determining the IEP is substantively
appropriate is the question of “whether the educational program provided for a child is

reasonably calculated to allow the child to receive ‘meaningful’ educational benefits.” Mrs. B. v.

15

May 13, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11-0212

Milford Board of Education, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120 (2nd Cir, 1997). Meaningful educational

 

beneﬁts are “not everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents.” Tucker v. Bay

Shore Union Free School Dist, 873 F.2d 563, 567 (2nd Cir. 1989). Rather, school districts are

 

required to provide a “‘basic ﬂoor ofopportunity’ . . . [by providing] access to specialized
services which are individually designed to provide educational benefit to the handicapped
child.” Boiley, m, 458 US. at 201; _s_e_e a_isg K.P. v. Juzwic, 891 F. Supp. 703, 718 (D.C0nn.
1995) (the goal of the IDEA is to provide access to public education for disabled students, not to
maximize a disabled child’s potential)

The IDEA also requires that children with disabilities be educated to the maximum extent
appropriate with children who are not disabled SE 34 C.F.R. § 300,114(a)(2)(i); Oberti v. Bd.
m, 995 F.2d 1204, 1216 (3d Cir. 1993); E gls_o 20 U.S.C1 § 1412(5)(b); Conn. State
Regs. §§ 10—76a-1(1 1) and 10-76d-1(a)(4). When determining whether a program is provided in
the least restrictive environment (“LRE”), a school district must examine the educational
beneﬁts, both academic and non~academic, to the student in a regular classroom Q Among the
factors to be considered when conducting this analysis are the advantages to be gained from
modeling the behavior and language of non-disabled students, the effect of such inclusion on the
other students in the Class, and the costs of necessary supplemental servicesﬁ

The IDEA requires “that schools take an individualized approach to each student” and
that “[w]hi1e including students in the regular classroom as much as is practicable is undoubtedly
a central goal of the IDEA, schools must attempt to achieve that goal in light of the equally
important objective of providing an education appropriately tailored to each student‘s particular
needs.” P. v. Newington Bd. ofEduc., 546 F.3d 111, 120-122, 51 IDELR 2 (2d Cir. 2008) The

Board complied with this requirement The evidence strongly supports that this Student would

16

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11-0212

obtain substantial beneﬁt from modeling the behavior and language of the nondisabled peers, and
this IEP provides this beneﬁt to the Student. [Testimony Dr. Nuzzolo]

The Board has met its burden of proof, demonstrating by a preponderance of evidence
that the IEP for the 2010-201 1 school year offers the Student a FAPE in the LRE, Each of the
disinterested, mutually agreed upon evaluators has stated that the IEP is substantively
appropriate. It offers much—needed specialized instruction from qualiﬁed providers, including
ceitiﬁed special education teachers qualiﬁed to teach the Student, as well as appropriate related
services to address the Student’s academic, social, self-help, occupational therapy, and speech
and language needs. The Student will have access to a comprehensive curriculum and
modiﬁcations of that curriculum to meet his learning needs.

The objective evidence in the record establishes that the Board's IEP would confer
meaningful educational beneﬁt on the Student. The PPT was informed by. three independent
evaluations of the Student’s needs. Both Dr. Nuzzolo and the home-based therapist revised the
Present Levels of Academic Achievement and Functional Performance. The PPT thus had
knowledge of the Student’s current needs when developing his program. The IEP also closely
mirrors the recommendations of all of the independent evaluators, which recommendations were
developed after observing the Student in his home program and completing appropriate
assessments.

Each of the independent evaluators reviewed and revised, as appropriate, the goals and
objectives in the IEP. The design of the Student’s program was also linked to other impottant
goals for the Student, including the oppmtunity to generalize his skills across multiple settings
and interact with peers from his home community. The proposed program for the Student

provided opportunities for collaboration and consultation. The Student’s program was also

17

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0212

provided in his least restrictive environment, maximizing the Student’s access to the typical
peers that each independent evaluator considered a critical component of the Student’s program.
[Testimony Dr. Nuzzolo]

All of the objective evidence in the Record establishes that the Student’s IEP was
substantively appropriate and that the Student could greatly beneﬁt from the Board’s program.
Each of the independent evaluators supported the substantive appropriateness of the IEP.4 The
IEP would confer meaningful educational beneﬁt on the Student. The Parents failed to present
any objective evidence that contradicted the substantive appropriateness of the IEP 0r justify the
placement of the Student in a restrictive self-contained environment. The IEP complies with the
substantive requirements of the IDEA.

Because the IEP offers an appropriate program in the LRE, the Parents are not entitled to
reimbursement for any other placement, including reimbursement for their home program and/or
the McCarton School, as the IDEA “does not require [a local educational agency] to pay for the
cost of education, including special education and related services, of a child with a disability at
a private school or facility if that agency made FAPE available to the child and the parents
elected to place the child in a private schoolfacililyt” 34 C.F.R. § 300.403(a) (emphasis added);
see also M.C. ex rel. Mrs. C. v. Voluntown Bd. of Ed., 226 F. 3d 60, 66 (2d Cir. 2000)

2004)
Only if it is concluded that the IEP is procedurally 0r substantively deﬁcient must we

reach the ﬁnal step and ask whether the Parents’ proposed placement or their home program is

4 The Parents ﬁxated on the fact that Dr. Nuzzolo did not state in her written report that Roxbury School would be
an appropriate location for the delivery ofthe Student’s educational program. Dre Nuzzolo testiﬁed, however, that
the Student should be placed in a center‘based, meaning school-based, program with access to typical peers, As is
good practice in her ﬁeld, Dr. Nuzzolo does not identify a panicular school in her recommendations. Rather, she
recommends components for the program and understands that it is the PPT decision to work together to determine
where the program should be implemented. All of the components of the program identiﬁed by Dr. Nuzzolo can be
provided at Roxbury Schooll [Testimony Dr. Nuzzolo]

18

May 13, 2011 Final Decision and Order ll~0212

appropriate to meet the needs of the Student. AC. and MC. v. Board of Education of Chappaqua

Central School District 553 F. 3d 165, 51 IDELR 147 (2nd Cir. 2009) Because it is found that

 

the IEP was neither procedurally ﬂawed nor substantively deﬁcient, it is not necessaiy to reach
the issue of whether the Parents’ home program was appropriate, whether the proposed program
at the McCarton School is appropriate, or whether any equitable considerations, substantial as
there are, would affect the relief. g5

The Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2010-1 1 school year is appropriate.
The Board did not commit any procedural Violations which resulted in a denial of FAPE during
the 2010—] 1 school year. The Parents are not entitled to reimbursement for their home program,
and the Board is not responsible for the funding of the Parents’ proposed placement of the

Student at the McCarton School.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

The Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2010-1 1 school year is appropriate.
2. The Board’s actions during the 2010-1 1 school year as outlined in the request for hearing
did not constitute procedural violations, and did not result in a denial of a free appropriate
public education [FAPE] to the Student.

The Parents shall not be reimbursed for their home program.

4. As the Board’s proposed program for the 2010-11 school year is appropriate, the Parents
shall not be reimbursed for their home program and the Board is not responsible for
funding the Parents’ proposed placement of the Student at the McCarton School.

b.)

5 Nevertheless, the Record is clear that the Parents have failed to establish the appropriateness of the home program
placement and the McCarton placement for which they request funding. It is also noted that the Parents signiﬁcantly
impeded the PPT process and made it extraordinarily difﬁcult to reach a resolution that would beneﬁt their son
and/or conduct an orderly hearing to resolve the parties’ dispute.

l9

 

