January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—041 2

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Jennifer Laviano, Esq.

The Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalfof the Board: Abby R. Wadler, Esq,

Assistant Town Attorney
Town of Greenwich

101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Mary 113 Gelfman, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES: (as agreed at the prehearing conference, May 9, 201 1):

1.

b)

Did the Board offer a free appropriate public education (FAPE) t0 the Student for the school
years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011?

11‘ not, is placement at Eagle Hill School appropriate to the Student’s special education needs
in the least restrictive environment?

If placement at Eagle Hi11 School is appropriate, is the Board responsible for reimbursement
to the Parents for documented costs of the placement for school years 20092010 and 2010
201 1?

ISSUES: (as added by agreement 01‘ the Parties, August 9, 201 1):

41

Is the proposed Individualized Education Program (IEP) for the 201 1—2012 school year
appropriate to the Student’s special education needs?

Ifnot, is placement at Eagle Hill School appropriate to the Student’s special education needs
in the least restrictive environment?

It‘placement for 201 1-2012 at Eagle Hill is appropriate. is the Board responsible for funding
that placement?

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

PROCEDURAL HISTORY (all dates are 2011 unless otherwise indicated):

This hearing was requested by Parents on April 21 and the Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on
April 25. The original date for mailing the decision was July 5,

A pre—hearing conference was held on May 9, At that time, the Parties reported that they had
agreed to waive the resolution meeting and request mediation From the State Department of
Education, although a mediation date had not been set. The hearing was scheduled for June 13
and 20, and July 12, 13, and 14. The mailing date for the decision was extended from July 5 to
August 4 to accommodate the additional hearing dates.

Mediation was scheduled for June 13, and the Parties requested that the hearing session
scheduled for June 13 be postponed. The Hearing Ofﬁcer granted that postponement. The
Board requested that the June 20 hearing session be postponed to provide more time for the
Board to respond to the Parents’ rejection of the proposed 201 12012 IEP. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
granted that postponement. The Hearing Ofﬁcer postponed the July 12, 13 and 14 hearing
sessions due to a scheduling conﬂict. The Parties agreed to schedule the hearing for August 8, 9
and 10‘ and requested extension of the decision date to September 2. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
granted the extension of the decision date and agreed to the new hearing dates.

On July 1 1 the Hearing Ofﬁcer added hearing dates of September 23 and 30. On July 25, Parents
informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that witnesses would not be available on August 8 and requested
that hearing date be postponed. The Hearing Ofﬁcer granted that request. In response to
requests from the Parties, the decision date was extended from September 2 to October 3.

The hearing convened on August 9. Due to unavailability of witnesses (luring summer vacation,
the August 10 hearing session was postponed. The Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the Patties’ request
to extend the decision date to November 2.

The hearing re—convened on September 23, but the September 30 session was postponed due to
illness. The Hearing Ofﬁcer l‘e—scheduled the hearing for October 20 and November 2. In
response to a request from Parents, 011 October 17 the Hearing Ofﬁcer extended the decision date
to December 2,

The hearing re—convened on October 20. The Parties requested that the November 2 hearing
session be postponed: the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted that request. On November 5, the Hearing
Ofﬁcer scheduled hearing sessions for December 20 and 21. The Parents requested that the
decision date be extended to January 2, 2012, and the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted that request.

The hearing re-convened on December 20 and 21. At the December 21 hearing session, the
Parties asked that they be allowed to submit briefs in lieu of closing arguments, and asked that
the decision date be extended to accommodate time for receipt of transcripts and brieﬁng. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer granted these requests and provided a brieﬁng schedule, Briefs were to be due
on January 13, 2012, At the request ot‘the Parties, the decision date was extended to February 1,
2012.

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

Briefs were received on January 13 and 17, 2012: Parents had requested an extension of the
deadline, which was granted. The record was closed on January 17, 2012.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

SUMMARY:

Parents unilaterally placed the Student at Eagle Hill School and are requesting that the Board
reimburse the costs of this placement for three school years. The Board maintains that it has
Offered appropriate programs and placements for the Student.

In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements 01‘ the Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act 01‘ 1974, 20 U,S.C. § 1232g and related regulations at 34 CFR. § 99, the following
decision uses “Student”, “School“, “Parent" and titles 01‘ school staff'members and other
witnesses in place 01‘ names and other personally identiﬁable information. In this decision,
“Board” is used for the Board ot‘Education or the school district and to identify school district
professional staff, as “Board’s School Psychologist”.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference
certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supported evidence on the
record. To the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually
represent conclusions 01‘1aw, they should be so considered, and Vice versa, For reference, see
SAS Insiimle Inc, v. H Computer Syslems, Inc, 605 F .Supp, 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie
Ann F. v. Calallen Independent School Dislricl, 835 P,Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex.

1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Panties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, 1 ﬁnd the following facts.

1. The Student was born on October 2, 1998, and is now thirteen years oi‘age, When he was
registered on March 22, 2004 for the Board’s Kindergarten for the school year 20042005, it
was noted that he had attended a private preschool. On the Kindergarten Parent
Questionnaire, his Mother reported that his pre—school teacher had noted “lack of focus
sometimes”, Other comments she made about the Student at that time included:

[N]ot socially 0r behaviorally, but he may struggle with penmanship and he may “tune
out” sometimes.
It is hard to keep him on task when the interest level is low or he feels he can’t
accomplish something.
The Assistant Principal at the Board’s Elementary School that Student attended remembered a
variety ofissues during his kindergarten year. (Ext P-17; Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr.
10/20/2011 pp. 6—8)

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 11-0412

2. The Student’s Parents had him evaluated by a Pediatric Neuropsychologist: the report ofthis
evaluation is dated July 18, 2004. His Preschool Teacher reported to this evaluator that his
progress had been variable:
Problems with following directions, working in groups, ﬁne motor struggles affecting
writing, and diminished confidence in his abilities. Socially, [the Student] does have
friends and is well liked by others. Core readiness skills were developing nicely.

The Pediatric Neuropsychologist’s report included his clinical impressions:
[The Student] presented as an adequately related youngster who put forth good effort in
the assessment situation). [The Student] has signiﬁcant attentional problems ..iWhile
the attentional issues are not derailing processing some vulnerability was noted in the
classroom and some degree of behavioral difficulty again in the classroom was noted. .,.
He does meet DSM-IV criteria for the Inattentive Type of ADHD [Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder] ...

The Pediatric Neuropsychologist provided two pages of recommendations for Student‘s

school program. (Ex. P—13 pp. 1, 58; B—14)

3. Student entered kindergarten at the Board’s Elementary School for the 2004—2005 school
year, (Ex. P—i)

4. A Board Physical Therapist (PT) observed the Student in school on October 1, 4, 8, and 18,
2004, This observation was noted as having been discussed at a Planning and Placement
Team (PPT) meeting held on September 14, 2004. The observation report included a
summary 01‘ ﬁndings/impressions:

[The Student] is a solidly built and strong little boy. [He] demonstrates the ability to
negotiate his school environment without difficulty. [He] appears to be a kinesthetic
learner, who learns most easily by doing activities and is oﬁen found in motion (as seen
when getting instruction from his classroom teacher and gym teacher). He appreciates
activities that allow for rough and tumble play and enjoys obtaining tactile feedback from
his environment (as seen from stomping and making contact with objects within reach),
At times, this behavior interferes with his success in the classroom. However, [his]
physical status is not interfering with his participation in and ability to beneﬁt from his
educational program, [PT] would not be expected to contribute to the achievement of
overall educational goals, and therefore further evaluation is not necessary at this time,
Recommendations by the PT:

0 Recommendations 01‘ adding gross motor activities with the entire class have been
discussed with [Classroom Teacher]. They may provide beneﬁt during times when
[Student] appears to need tactile input or activity to expel energy during class periods,

0 [Student] may have more success in the hallway or walking between classes by being
provided an activity to do or responsibility to carry out (such as helping the teacher carry
something or being line leader),

0 Also, [Student] would benefit from activities outside the school environment, such as
martial arts, Pilates or yoga for children, and swimming, which promote balance and
redirection of energy. (Ex. B—iS)

January 30, 20i2 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

5. The Student was evaluated by a private Occupational Therapist (OT), whose report is dated

November 28, 2004. This report identiﬁed signiﬁcant deﬁcits:

o Processing/integration 0f proprioceptive input from muscles and joints

0 Limited proximal tone, body awareness and kinesthetic sense

- Deﬁcits in postural control and the ability to maintain adequate posture for the
performance of visual motor tasks

a Deﬁcits in motor planning 2 including devising and implementing consistent motor plans
as well as learning new tasks

0 Deﬁcits in visual motor integration including learning letter formation, coloring, cutting
and drawing skills

0 Deficits in gross motor coordination and ability to master new games/sports

Recommended goals were provided:

0 Gross motor games and exercise to increase proximal control/tone, body awareness and
kinesthetic sense

0 Gross motor activities that involve complex movement, sequencing and timing to
increase motor planning skills

0 Visual motor activities to increase visual motor integration and to improve writing,
coloring, drawing and cutting skills

0 Instruction in multisensory approach to handwriting e.g. handwriting without tears to
enhance ﬁne motor piamiing skills

0 Provide equipment to support visual motor activities in school e.g. pencil grip/wide barrel
pencils, slant board, color coded writing paper, seat cushions

- Explore alerting activities that can help {Student} maintain focus independently in school
(Ex. B-16 pp. 6-7)

6. The Board of Education’s OT performed an evaluation on January 1 1, 2005. This evaluator
reported difﬁculties with visual motor skills, certain areas of visual perception, sensory
integration, maintaining focus, increased amount of pressure on the writing utensil when
copying the alphabet and inability to sit still in his seat for a period oftime. She
recommended OT services at school to address these problems. (Ex. B—1 8 pp. 56)

7. A Board PPT meeting was held on January 18, 2005. Reference was made in the record 01‘
this meeting to an earlier PPT meeting that had found Student eligible for special education
based on the netu'opsychological evaluation provided by Parents and had identiﬁed him as
Other Health Impaired. OT services were planned, and the PPT adjourned to a meeting to
consider services to be provided under Section 504. This meeting was attended by
Elementary School Assistant Principal, Student’s Mother, Regular and Special Education
Teachers, 21 School Psychologist and an OT. (Ex. P—21)

8, A partially illegible Early Intervention/Modiﬁcation Plan described Student’s problems in
kindergarten as: lack of attention, difﬁculty following directions, difﬁculty with completion
of tasks In February 2005 a plan was devised to help the Student listen to and understand
directions by repeating directions. This plan was reviewed in April 2005 and continuing
difﬁculties were noted‘ (Ex. P-18)

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

9.

10.

11,

12

The Student’s Kindergarten Progress Report for 2004-2005 showed “demonstrates
consistently”, “signiﬁcant progress shown”, “progress shown”, “has achieved all, 01' almost
all, kindergarten objectives”, or “has achieved most kindergarten objectives” in every area,
Teacher comments were enthusiastic, but also included:
March 2005: [The Student's] work habits continue to suffer due to his inattentiveness
and distractibility. When focused and on task he is able to complete work accurately and
in the allotted time. However, he often needs constant reminders to remain on task and
without them will take quite a bit of extra time to complete tasks.
May 2005: [The Student] continues to make progress in his academics as well as his
social skills. He is reading books independently and in the reading group and is able to
write responses based on what he has lead. He is improving his ability to sound out his
words to write sentences, however his handwriting continues to be illegible [The
Student] works hard to combine drawing and writing and has had some success in
drawing clearer pictures when he is concentrating, Unfortunately, he is often distracted
while doing his work which causes him to require extended time to complete tasks. [The
Student’s] math skills are good and he enjoyed math and is able to add and subtract using
manipulatives with ease. [The Student] will beneﬁt greatly from continued practice at
home working on his reading and writing, as well as his handwriting and focus.
(Ex. P—22)

A PPT meeting was held 011 September 13, 2005, at the beginning ol‘Student’s ﬁrst grade
year. This meeting was attended by Elementary School Assistant Principal, both ol‘Studcnt‘s
Parents, Regular and Special Education Teachers, at School Psychologist, an ()T and two
members 01‘ the Board’s Evaluation Team. The PPT recommended educational and
psychological evaluations, and Patents consented to the evaluations at that meeting.

(Ex. B-32)

By letter dated October 12, 2005, and noted as received by the Assistant Principal 011 October
20, 2005, Student’s Mother repoﬁed:
I am attaching a memo from our family pediatrician [name omitted] requesting a hold 011
the [school] testing of {Student}
We will be conducting medical tests as well as some coordinating psychological tests
during this time and will follow up with a letter about reinstating the testing.
We will be asking [Teacher] to ﬁll out a rating scale regarding [Student] as part ofthe
testing. She will be forwarding it directly to [Pediatrician] to maintain confidentiality,
allowing her to give the best possible information for the tests.
The School staff interpreted this as parental withdrawal of consent to evaluate. (EX, B—34
pp.l, 2; Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr. 10/20/20] 1 pp. 9—10; Testimony, Mother,
Tr. 12/20/2011 pp. 12-14)

, Parents arranged for a private psychological evaluation ol‘the Student by a licensed Clinical

Psychologist. Testing was done on October 14, 17 and 19. November 1‘ 4, 8, 15. 18, 22, 28.
29 and 30‘ December 2, 13, 23 and 30, 2005 and January 9, 2006, The Clinical
Psychologist’s report included a summary:

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 11—0412

The results of this evaluation suggest that [Student] has Dyslexia and an Anxiety
Disorder. As noted above, he does not have a thought disorder, but the quality of his
thinking deteriorates when he becomes overwhelmed with anxiety

[discussion of reading disorders]

An anxiety disorder is diagnosed when a child has excessive anxiety and worry about a
number of events, and ﬁnds it difﬁcult to control the worry. The anxiety is associated
with symptoms such as restlessness, being easily fatigued, difﬁculty concentrating,
irritability, muscle tension, and sleep problems. These problems have to be signiﬁcant
enough to cause the child to be distressed or create signiﬁcant social 01' academic
problems. (Ext B~l7, pp 1, 21—22)

13. The Clinical Psychologist provided reconmiendations:

A multi—dimensional approach to treatment is recommended.

Parents may wish to investigate an alternative educational setting. [suggested private
schools] While [Student] remains in his current educational setting, he would greatly
beneﬁt from working with a learning specialist.

Modifications should be provided in the current classroom setting regarding work which
requires reading and writing.

Intensive [OT] evaluation should continue.

T here is concern about [Student’s] written expression and use of language, In addition,
whenever a diagnosis of Dyslexia is made, a language evaluation by a medical speech
and language pathologist is recommended in order to help pinpoint the nature ol‘these
problems, and to devise appropriate remedial strategies.

It is believed that the ideal treatment approach to anxiety disorders is to combine
medication with psychotherapy, so that the child learns effective coping strategies.
Therefore, it is felt that [Student] would benefit from weekly individual psychotherapy.
[Student] should also be evaluated by a child psychiatrist who can assess the efﬁcacy ofa
medication trial. (Ex. B—l7 pp, 22-23)

14. The Clinical Psychologist also made speciﬁc recommendations concerning the Student‘s
school program, commenting that some ol‘thcm would be appropriate when he is older. (Ex.
B—17 pp. 23—29)

15‘ A Section 504 Student Accommodation Plan for the Student dated February 28, 2006,
described a concern about Student’s “ﬁnc-motor difficulties, visual—motor weaknesses,
inattentiveness”. An outside neuropsychological evaluation had provided a diagnosis of
Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder. The impact of this diagnosis was reported as:

Work completion, ability to complete routine tasks
Completing written work in time] y fashion + fulfilling morning routines.

Necessary accommodations to be implemented were:

0

Continue w/ OT services (2X/week)
Reminders to stay on task, preferential seating
Review in June 2006.

This meeting was attended by Student’s Mother, a School Psychologist, Student’s Teacher
and an OTi (Ex. P—l9)

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

A Speech and Language Screening performed on April 28, 2006 was reported by a Board
Speech/Language Pathologist (S/LP). She determined that Student “does not appear to have
signiﬁcant difﬁculty processing language 01‘ producing language in terms ot‘form, content 01'
structure according to the results of [CELFl lnformally, it was observed that [Student] was
able to carry on a conversation, respond to questions, give directions when asked, follow
directions, share social information, make sufficient eye contact, produce complete sentences
of adequate syntactic structure and grammatic form and produce age—appropriate speech.
(Ex. B-19)

The PPT met on May 9, 2006, with Elementary School Assistant Principal, Mother, Regular
and Special Education Teachers, School Psychologist, School S/LP, School OT and two
members of the Evaluation Team present. Since Student was “successfully completing grade
level work” the PPT did not pursue consent to complete the evaluations. 1t was noted that the
PPT would reconvene it' the Parents would share the results ot‘their private evaluations. (Ex,

13—31)

Parents placed Student at Villa Maria, a state—approved private special education school in
Stamford, for the 2006—2007 and 2007-2008 school years. (Ex. P-l; Testimony of Mother,
Tr, 12/202011 pp. 15-17; Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr. 10/20/2011 pp. 10~12)

In early 2008, Mother inquired about special education services for Student. She was
advised by the Assistant Principal at his former Board Elementary School that an evaluation
would be necessary, and that Stamford, the town where the private school was located, was
responsible for providing such an evaluation. Mother contacted Stamford, consented to
evaluation, and an Achievement Assessment and a Psychoeducational Evaluation were
performed. (Ex. B~30; Testimony, Elementary School Assistant Principal)

The Psychoeducational Evaluation was performed by Stamford school personnel on March

17, 2008, Concerns noted by teachers were: handwriting, organization, distractibility and

developing abstract thinking ability, Student’s areas of strength were: grammar,

mathematical abilities, decoding and spelling skills, solid comprehension, work completion

and positive adult and peer relations. This evaluator noted:
Observations: [Student] is a friendly and sweet young boy. His speech was normal and
was clearly understood as he conversed easily with the examine): Throughout the testing
sessions, [Student] appeared to be conﬁdent in his abilities. His vision, hearing,
understanding and motor control appeared to be within the normal ranges. He was
always very polite and was a pleasure to work with A nice rapport was established and
[Student] appeared alert and oriented. Overall, [Student] worked diligently throughout
the testing sessions and as he was involved in the tasks presented, the results of this
evaluation should be viewed as a valid indication of current levels of functioning.

The Stamford School Psychologist listed the tests administered: WISC-IV, GORT—4, TRS of

the BASC—2, PRS ofthe BASC—2, VCPT, and VMl. The evaluation also included projective

drawings, an interview of the Student and a File Review. (Ex. B—21 p, 2-3)

The Summary and Conclusions of the April, 2008, report of the Stamford Psychoeducational
Evaluation are summarized:

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

Overall level oi‘intellectual functioning in the average range; general verbal

comprehension abilities superior range; general perceptual reasoning abilities high

average range.

Verbal reasoning and nonverbal reasoning abilities are better developed than his ability to

process visual material quickly.

Fluency and comprehension on the GORT—4 average range. Oral Reading Quotient

average range. Weakness in visual-motor skills

On the BASC~2, one teacher found Student’s physical symptoms ofstrcss in the At~Risk

range, and his Mother found taking care ofhis needs and expressing his needs or ideas in

the At—Risk range.

Student’s attention appeared to wane as time progressed.

Projectivc drawings may indicate high aspirations for himself, wariness in meeting

expectations and possible feelings ofanxiety

In his interview with the School Psychologist, the Student revealed positive family

relations, a sense of conﬁdence and explained how he would like to become a Steciei's

football player.

The Stamford School Psychologist’s recommendations:

0 Share the results of this evaluation at PPT with a multidisciplinary team and
[Student’s] parents.

0 Share concerns with Visual motor integration skills with [OT].

- Encourage [Student] to read aloud at home for at least 30 minutes a day to improve
decoding and comprehension skills

0 Due to concentration concerns, break down challenging tasks into 4 minute or less
increments oftime. (Ex. B—21, pp 12-13)

221 The Achievement Assessment was performed by Stamford school personnel on April 2,
2008. The Stamford Special Education Teacher made a classroom observation of the Student
at Villa Maria and administered the Woodcock—Johnson [11 Test ot‘Achicvement, Form B.
Student’s scores:

Cluster _S§
Broad Reading 103
Broad Math 1 12
Broad Written Language 104
Total Achievement 107

The evaluator commented:
When compared to the scores earned by other at his age level, [Student’s] overall level of
achievement is average. His academic skills are in the high average range. [Student’s]
ability to apply academic skills is within the high average range His ﬂuency with
academic tasks is within the low average range.
When compared to others at his age level, [Student’s] standard score is superior in math
reasoning. His basic reading skills, broad mathematics and briefmathematics scores are
in the high average range. His standard scores are average (compared to age peers) in
broad reading, brief“ reading, math calculation skills, broad written language, written
expression and briel‘writing. (Ex. B-21, pp. 1, 8-9, 14—15) :

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

23.

24.

25.

26.

After Stamford had completed the evaluations, a PPT was called in that school district to
consider whether Student was eligible for special education Present at the June 3, 2008,
Stamford PPT meeting were an administrative dcsignee, Mother, a Special Education
T eacher, a School Psychologist and a School Social Worker. The Stamford PPT reviewed
the evaluation results and determined that Student was not eligible for special education.
Attached to the record of this meeting was a list ofsuggestions from the Stamford School
Psychologist:
Student does not meet state/federai guidelines for speciﬁc learning disabilities
identiﬁcation due to commensurate intellectual and academic levels, however, concerns
are raised by mild to moderate processing weaknesses that may be related to his
identiﬁed anxiety issues
0 Provide extended time and quiet, supportive setting for course and standardized
testing to compensate for slow processing speed.
0 Reduce written work to minimum to help with visual-motor integration delays.
Explore alternative ways to test for concept mastery other than in written form.
0 Check early for task understanding (ask him what he is to do and where he will start)
and check on progress. Attention support.
0 Break down instructions into short, concise statements.
0 Break down work into shon units. Present one unit at a time to reduce stress.
0 Provide multiple supports for new information (Visual written lists of crucial
information, facts, dates, names, etc., pictures, graphs, models ot‘ﬁnished work ...)
0 Teach efﬁcient note taking skills and keyboarding abilities as student gets older
0 Explore ways to provide counseling support in a school setting Encourage and help
student practice self—cahning techniques. (Ex. B-30; P—2)

Although Student started the 2008—2009 school year at a different private school, he re-
enrollcd at the Board’s Elementary School in October, 2008. His Mother had discussed his
re—em‘ollment with school staff, but no documentation of his prior private school placements
was provided to the school and no speciﬁc date for actual enrollment had been agreed to.
The Board‘s Elementary School requested Parents to release Student’s records from his prior
schools to assist in planning for him. No records were received. The first day that Student
appeared at school, the teacher who had been designated for him was absent. However, some
ot‘the students remembered him and the Substitute Teacher and his friends helped him to get
settled. (Ex, B—34 pp. 15, 18, 20, 22; Testimony ot'Mother, Tr. 12/20/201 1 pp. 25—30;
Testimony ot‘Elementary School Assistant Principal, 10—20/2011 pp. 14-17; Testimony of
4‘“ grade teacher, T11 12/20/2011 p. 133—134)

The 4lh grade Teacher whose class Student joined has an M.A. in Early Childhood and
Elementary Education and eleven years of experience at the Board’s Elementary School.
This Teacher accepted some ot‘Mother’s suggestions for individual accommodations for the
Student, and provided the services approved at the October 30, 2008 PPT meeting. (Ex. B-
38; Testimony, 4'h Grade Teacher Tr. 12/20/201 1 p, 160)

The Board’s PPT met on October 30, 2008, to consider the Stamford evaluation. Present
were Elementary School Assistant Principal, both Parents, Regular and Special Education

Teachers, School Psychologist and S/LP. Pending the gathering ot‘information for

10

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

27.

28.

29‘

consideration ol‘Student’s possible eligibility for special education services, the team agreed

that since he had been receiving services under Section 504 when he was previously enrolled

at the Board’s school, some services would be provided immediately:

0 Organizational tools

0 Preview questions before reading text to help him know what he needs to be looking for
as he reads

0 Assign a classroom buddy

0 When appropriate, provide a second set of books for home (some materials can be
accessed via the computer (math) )

0 Provide work sheets with less on the page (Mom feels too much on a page has a negative
impact on Student

0 Have Student use a computer program once a week to improve fluency

0 Have Student participate in a fluency group

0 Provide a color tracking overlay (Ex. B—28; Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr.
10/20/2011 pp. 23)

The 4lh grade teacher provided the classroom modiﬁcations agreed to at the October 30,
2008, PPT meeting. This Teacher observed that Student found writing very difﬁcult: he
enjoyed her writing to his dictation, She tried having him use a computer to write, but
observed that his speed was “very, very slow”.

(Testimony, 4‘h grade Teacher, Tr, 12/20/2011 pp, 136-141)

The PPT met on December 18, 2008, to consider a psychological evaluation from 2005

provided by Parents. Present at this meeting were Elementary School Assistant Principal,

Mother, Father by telephone, Regular and Special Education Teachers, School Psychologist

and S/LP. (This evaluation is discussed at Findings of Fact 12-14, above.) The record 01‘

this meeting shows that the reason for the meeting was “consider private evaluation/upclate”

and the primary disability was “To be determined? The record also shows that Student was

not eligible for special education, The PPT recommended the following classroom

modiﬁcations:

0 [Student] will participate in a ﬂuency group which will work on word attack skills

0 A new word study book will be given to [Student]

0 A homework buddy will be designated for [Student]

0 [Mother] will send in a note ifshe doesn’t see his word study list

0 [Mother] was provided a math reference book to keep at home

[Classroom Teacher] will continue to check [Student’s] assigntnent book

Intervention in the area ()1 written expression will be implemented

0 [Mother] doesn’t leel that it‘s necessary to provide assignments with less inlbrmation 0n
the page

Mother was quoted as saying that she did not want Student‘s 504 plan (from grade 1)

implemented, (Ex. B—l)

The PPT met again on February 4, 2009, because Parents disagreed with the Stamford
evaluation and denial ol‘eligibility for special education. Present were Elementary School
Assistant Principal, both Parents, Regular and Special Education Teachers, School

11

 

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order I 1—0412

30.

31.

32,

Psychologist and two members of the Evaluation Team. The PPT discussed the need for
evaluations by school staff. Parents signed consent for the completion ofeducational and
psychological evaluations, as well as observations and rating scales. (Ex. B—2)

The Board staff performed a Multidisciplinary Evaluation on March 17 and 31, 2009. The

School Psychologist and the Educational Evaluator provided recommendations for the PPT:

0 Since pencil and paper work in a timed context results in a poor product and increased
anxiety, some consideration should be given to alternate formats when reasonable.

0 All directions should be delivered utilizing multiple sensory domains to maintain his
focus and interest.

0 {Student} would beneﬁt from staff allowing him time to process concepts prior to
beginning work.

- Repetition ofdirections is imperative. Ideally, [Student] should demonstrate his
understanding to the teacher prior to beginning independent work

0 Increased repetition and review would help [Student] become more ﬂuent, though
accuracy should be prioritized.

0 Parents and staff members should consider the effect that frequent change may have on
[Student] and modify expectations as necessary. (Ex. B23 p. 12)

Student’s 4‘" grade report card for the 2008-2009 school year in the Board’s Elementary
school showed the following grades:
Social Development: ﬁrst marking period, one “very good” (VG), two “satisfactory” (S);
second marking period, two VG and one S; third marking period, two VG and one S.
Work Habits and Attitudes: ﬁrst marking period one S and four NI (not introduced);
second marking period one VG and four NI; third marking period, one VG, one S and
three NI.
Reading: ﬁrst marking period, two VG, three S; second marking period, one VG, four S;
third marking period, two VG, three S, lEnd-of—year grade S.
Oral Language: ﬁrst marking period, one VG, two S; second marking period‘ two VG,
one S; third marking period, three Excellent (E); end—of—year grade B.
Writing: ﬁrst marking period, three VG, two S, two Nl; second marking period, one VG,
three S, three Nl; third marking period, one VG, live S, one N1; end-otlyear grade, S.
Mathematics: ﬁrst marking period, one VG, one S; second marking period, two S; third
marking period, one VG, one S.
Social Studies: l'n'st marking period, no grades; second marking period, three S; third
marking period, three VG; end-of—year grade, VG.
Science: ﬁrst marking period, two VG, one S; second marking period, three 8; third
marking period, two VG, one S; end—ollyear grade, VG. (Ext B-36 p. 1)

This report card also noted that Student had been tardy 45 days in the school year, When the
4‘" Grade Teacher asked Student’s Mother about his frequent lateness, she responded that he
was difﬁcult to get going in the morning and was also spending time with his Father. The
Teacher was concerned because the time that Student missed at the beginning of the day was
used to get organized for the day. Mother also defended nine absences as health—t'elaled
doctor‘s appointments and visits to other schools. (Ex. 836 p. 1; Testimony 4‘h Grade

12

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

TeacherTr. 12/20/2011 p. 147-149;Testimony, Mother,'l‘1‘. 9/23/2011 pp, 93, 101—105;
Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr. 10/20/201 1 pp. 53-57)

33, The Student’s 4lh grade report card for the 2008-2009 school year at the Board’s Elementary
School included narrative comments from his classroom teacher:

Fall 2008: [Student] seems to be a capable writer when he commits himself to
expressing his thoughts on paper. His writing is structurally sound, and can be
descriptive, but his capitalization and punctuation can be distracting to the meaning he is
trying to convey. I understand that the physical act ol‘writing is difﬁcult for [Student],
and next marking period we will experiment with using a keyboard
Although his attention has improved since he ﬁrst arrived, [Student] is easily distracted,
and can bring others off task as well. He is slow to begin a task, and often does not have
the materials needed, but he understands the directions and is able to complete the
assignment. He has shown no trouble with recording homework or notes from the board.
He has completed all assessments within the time period prescribed, and his scores show
a high level of comprehension.
March 2009: This marking period has been difﬁcult for [Student]. He has been
distracted and reserved. I do not sense that he is involved in his learning. Although he
does not draw other students off task anymore, he does not engage with them in positive
ways either. His attention is often focused on items inside his desk, and he needs
frequent reminders to attend to lessons and to his work 1 am so pleased to see sparkles
0f the old [Student] from time to time, and will continue to encourage him in any way 1
can.
Our writing has been proliﬁc with two major goals improvement 01‘ narrative and short
answers to questions. Fluent organization ofideas is hard for [Student], and he tends to
state his thoughts without suppoit. His narratives start out with some steam, and even
incorporate some description, but he quickly loses focus and stamina. The stories are
short and unelaborated. [Student’s] vocabulary is strong, and his editing skills are solid,
but punctuation is not consistently present in his own writing. Although his keyboarding
is still very slow (about 2 sentences per ‘/2 hour), we will give it a try, and see if it helps.
In reading we focused on nonﬁction as [Student] researched facts about sharks for the
inlbrmational narrative we are writing now. He drew some detailed drawings, but found
few facts to support his story We also read a variety of shoﬁ text, including poetry, to
improve analysis and written response to text. [Student] participated in a small group to
improve leading skills and written response.
Math tackled difﬁcult concepts such as the relationship between decimals, fractions, and
metric measurement We also struggled with difﬁcult algorithms emulti—digit
multiplication and paitial products division. [Student] has not met the goal oi‘30 basic
facts per minute in any operation except addition. He has improved, but will need to
practice diligently at home to meet the goal by the end ol‘the year. Otherwise his skills
are ﬁne. He grasps concepts quickly, and is often able to help other students. Math is
[Student’s] strongest discipline, and he is proud ol‘being able to help others.
A new science unit is explored each marking period, and grades often ﬂuctuate
depending on student interest/motivation and the nature of the investigation,
licology/Zoology is more laiiguagc~based than the experimental Electricity unit was. The

13

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

34.

35.

36,

concept of adaptation to change in the environment is less concrete, and more difﬁcult to
understand.

June 2009: Overall, the year has been an adventure, and [Student] has shown growth in
most subject areas. He should be especially proud of the excellent portrayal of Mark
Twain that he presented to the class. I was very impressed with his perceptive
understanding ot‘ the issues and personalities that shape the history of our country, His
comments and questions deepened our discussions. I am also pleased that he reading
ﬂuency has improved, and that he almost made the goal 01‘30 math facts per minute!
[Student] should continue reading and writing over the summer to better prepare for Slh
grade. (Ex. B-36 p. 2))

Included with Student’s 2008-2009 report card was a listing of math topics as “beginning”,
“developing” and “secure”. Nineteen were rated secure at the end Ofthe year, eleven were
rated developing and none were rated as beginning. (Ex. B—36 p. 3)

The Board’s PPT met on April 22, 2009. Present were Elementary School Assistant
Principal, Mother, Regular and Special Education T eaehers, School Psychologist and two
members of the Evaluation Team. The purpose of this meeting was to review evaluations
and determine eligibility for special education. The PPT determined that Student was
eligible for special education as Learning Disabled. The School Psychologist and
Educational Evaluator recommended six program elements for the Student in their written
report. Mother provided a current update from Student’s private OT. Because the PPT ran
out of time, Mother did not have an opportunity to discuss a proposed IEPr She did not sign
consent to implement special education services, and took the draft IEP home to study. (Ex.
B—12; Testimony, Assistant Principal, 'l‘r. 10/20/2011 pp 34-38; Testimony, Mother, Tr.
12/20/201 1 pp. 40-44)

The PPT meeting continued on April 23, 2009, with Elementary School Assistant Principal,

Mother, Regular and Special Education Teachers and S/LP in attendance. Present Levels 01'

Academic Achievement and Functional Pertbrmance were determined as:
Aeademic/Cognitive: Language Arts: Strengths: [Student] has shown many strengths
in the areas ot‘reading and writing. both in his classwork and in previous testing. He met
the fourth grade benchmarks on the Fountas & Pinne] testing (one-to-one test that
measures eomprehensions and accuracy). In writing, [Student] is able to write personal
narratives that include action and a beginning, middle and end, as well as a problem, plan
and solution
Concerns/Challenges/Needs: [Student] has a difﬁcult time with tasks requiring ﬂuency.
He needs to work on his ﬂuency in reading grade level passages. Additionally, he needs
to work on his ﬂuency in writing to convey a meaning.
Impact of Student’s Disability: Due to [Student’s] challenges with ﬂuency, he may
need wait time in the classroom. Additionally, he will benefit from looking at the quality
ot‘tlle work he completes (as opposed to the quantity) or increased time for production.
Academic/Cognitive: Math: Strengths: From classroom pertbrmance as well as
previous testing, [Student’s] ability to work in the grade level math curriculum with the
concepts presented is intact

14

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order I 1—0412

Concerns/Challenges/l‘leeds: [Student] also has difﬁculty with ﬂuency when it comes
to his math production, speciﬁcally basic facts. On the WJIH Math Fluency Subtest,
[Student] scored an 88 of 92. While this score is still in the average range, it is a relative
weakness for him.
Impact of Student’s Disability: [Student] may need some additional time on his math
work as most math problems rely on computation which will come out slower for
[Student]. He may also need someone to review the dii‘ections/concepts with him to
ensure that he under stands the material when presented.
Social/Emotional: Strengths: [Student] is a friendly [child] who wants to please and do
well. He has a good fund of information and is knowledgeable about a variety ol’topies.
He wants to be accepted by peers and adults.
Concerns/Challcnges/Needs: [Student] is sensitive to criticism and he does not feel
conﬁdent. 1-Iet1'ies to hide his weaknesses and is vulnerable. This creates a negative
cycle which reinforces his low self esteem
Impact of Student’s Disability: This impacts [Student’s] ability to rely on his strengths
and participate in class and social activities.
Areas that were marked “Age/Grade Appropriate” were: Other Academic/Nonaeademic
areas; Communication; Vocational/l‘ransition; Health and Development ~ Vision and
Hearing; Fine Motor; Gross Motor: and Activities of Daily Living. (Ex. B—5 pp. 7—8)

37‘ Goals for 2009-2010 proposed at the April 23, 2009, PI’T meeting:
Goal #1: [Student] will increase his rate ol‘i‘cading in fourth grade level tests to 30 words
over baseline.
Goal #2: Given a speciﬁc topic or picture to write about, [Student] will be able to
produce four meaningful sentences in a minute about the picture,
Goal #3: Given a closed set (based on those he knows) 01‘ math facts from one operation,
[Student] will increase his rate of ﬂuency with the facts.
Goal #4: [Student] will increase his conﬁdence and ability to help himself when he
encounters something that is difﬁcult for him to do. (Ex. B~5 pp. 1 1-15)

38, Program modiﬂcations/accommodations for Student in the April 23, 2009 IEP:
Matei'ials/Books/Equipment: Graphic Organizers for writing, duration ol‘the lEP.
Tests/Quizzes/Time: Separate seating except spelling; extra time — 150%, duration of the
IEP.

Grading: Focus on quality over quantity or allow extra time, duration of the IEP.
Organization: Provide structures to organize paperwork, duration of the lEP.
Behavior Managcmeut/Support: Point out [Student’s| strengths, positive
reinforcement, duration of the IEP.

Instructional Strategies: Allow wait time & break down longer tasks, Multi-sensory
approach, have Student restate information, review directions, duration ofthe IEP. (Ex,
B~5 p.16)

39. The April 23, 2009, PPT provided that Student receive some accommodations for State and
District testing. While he would take the standard CMT/CAPT, accommodations ol‘time and
test setting would be provided. For Districtwide Assessments, he would take the standard
assessments also with accommodations. (Ex. 8-5 pp. 18, 23)

15

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45,

The April 23, 2009, IEP provided for Student to receive his instruction in reading, writing
and math groups in the special education classroom from special education teachers. The
PPT also determined that he did not need any assistive technology or an extended school year
in order to beneﬁt from special education The Mother did not sign consent for Student’s
initial special education placement, but did take the proposed IEP home to review, (Ex. B-S
pp.21, 24-26; Testimony, Mother, Tr. 12/20/201 1 pp. 44-50)

The report of OT screening on May 1, 2009, included a recommendation that he have an OT
evaluation. (Ex. B—8 p. 1)

The PPT re—convencd on May 7, 2009, with Elementary School Assistant Principal, Mother,
Regular and Special Education 'l‘cachers and School Psychologist in attendance. The
purpose 0fthis meeting was to review the proposed IEP. Student’s Mother had called the
Assistant Principal to tell her that she didn’t feel that the proposed lliP was appropriate for
Student. The PPT agreed to add reading services 5 X ()0 minutes a week in a general
education setting in another fourth grade classroom. The Mother requested a private school
placement for Student, which the PPT school members refused. (Ex. B-9 pp. 1,2; Testimony,
Mother, Tr. 12/20/2011 pp 51-54)

On May 7, 2009, Mother signed consent for an OT evaluation 01‘ the Student. Mother wrote
the following on the consent form for initial special education placement and signed in the
margin:
1 consent that my son is eligible for special education under the learning disability
category. 1 do not consent to the placement described in this lEP, because it is not
appropriate [illegible copy]. (Ex, B-6 pp.3, 7; Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr.
10/20/201 1 pp. 42-45)

An OT evaluation ol‘Student was performed on June 17, 2009. The report of this evaluation
concluded:
[Student] was cooperative and motivated during the evaluation and in addition was polite
and interactive with this therapist. He presented with many areas of strengths. Based on
the above information, [Student] would not beneﬁt from direct [OT] services in the
school setting.
School/Home Reconunendations
- [Student] would beneﬁt from continued keyboarding instruction, as this is a fine
motor task that also provides a functional skill for academic use. Keyboarding helps
to enhance the speed of written communication
0 Encourage [Student] to participate in daily typing practice once instruction has begun
to practice these skills and to provide daily ﬁne motor and Visual motor activities at
home.
0 [Student] would beneﬁt from having a letter strip and editing checklist on his desk to
enhance his legibility and accuracy. (Ex. B»23 p. 4)

The PPT re—convened on June 23, 2009, to review the OT evaluation Elementary School
Assistant Principal, Mother, Regular and Special Education Teachers and School

16

January 30~ 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

46.

47,

48.

49.

Psychologist were in attendance. The OT evaluation concluded with a ﬁnding that Student
would not beneﬁt from direct OT services in the school setting. The PI’T accepted the OT
repoﬁ and denied OT services. (Ex. B—12) B-23 pp. 1-5)

Parents enrolled Student in the Upper School at Eagle Hill School for the 2009—201 0 school
year. Eagle Hill is approved by the Connecticut State Department of Education for
placement of students with disabilities. Student continued at Eagle Hill for the 201020] 1
and 201 1—2012 school years. (Testimony, Mother, Eagle Hill Educational Advisor; Tr.
8/9/2011 pp. 10—1 1, 13)

The Student’s Educational Advisor at Eagle Hill described him as anxious at the beginning of
the 2009-2010 school year. He had expressed his anxiety in “silly” behavior that was
difﬁcult to discourage and problems with transitions during the school day, She also

reponed that he did settle down to work, (Testimony, Educational A(lvisor, Tr. 8/9/20] 1 pp.
14-18, 31-37)

Parents arranged for a private psychological evaluation of Student which was performed on
February 8, 9 and 17, 2010. The February 26, 2010, report of this evaluation provided a
DSM IV diagnosis:

Axis One: Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder, Primarily lnattentive Type,
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Axis two Learning Disorder !
Axis T hree No reponed problems
Axis Four Educational Problems

Axis Five 65 (Ex, 24 p, 23)

The February 26, 2010, psychological evaluation report concluded with a sunnnaly and

reconnnendations. The Student was described as functioning in the upper end ot‘the average

range of intellectual capability. He has strengths in abstract verbal reasoning skills and

knowledge of general information. He has an excellent vocabulary, but is sometimes slow to

organize his verbal thoughts. Knowledge 01‘soeia1 information is quite strong. ,
[Student] possesses a strong capability to complete tasks involving perceptual reasoning :
and spatial reasoning. His understanding 01‘part4vhole Visual relationships is excellent
and he is able to grasp visual patterns Yet, he is having signiﬁcant difﬁculty in
processing and integrating complex visual information. He becomes overwhelmed by
visual complexity and demonstrates symptoms consistent with a visual convergence
deﬁciency. He has weaknesses on tasks involving visual motor integration, though he
appears to have made improvements in this area over the last several years. His overall
processing speed is quite weak and he demonstrates very weak cognitive efﬁciency,
[Student] possesses weak levels ofattention spans His cognitive arousal levels are ‘
relatively low for an 1 1—year old boy. He demonstrates adequate impulse control but is i
weak in areas relating to cognitive ﬂexibility. While his active working memory skills
are within the average range, there are inconsistencies in his ability to keep information
in a sequential format when he is performing mental manipulations with the information.
Furthermore, on tasks involving executive functions, he often struggles (Testimony,
Psychologist, Tr. 9/23/2011; Ex. B—24)

17

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

50.

51.

52.

53.

541

55.

56.

This Psychologist commented that Student “quickly reached a level of fatigue” during the
evaluation. More than once on the days ol‘the evaluation, Student expressed anxiety about
his performance. Student also commented that work often took him longer than his
classmates at school. This Psychologist also recommended “more intensive intervention in
terms of executive function development”. He also endorsed Student’s need to develop his
keyboarding skills. In a briefencounter with Student in August 201 1, the Psychologist
described him as “poised? (Testimony, Psychologist, Tr. 9/23/201 1, pp. 8, 13-14, 27, 31-33,
46, 50, 74)

The February 26, 2010, report ol‘the psychological evaluation concludes with five pages of
suggestions for Student‘s educational program. Many ot'the suggestions duplicate those
made by the Stamford PPT, accommodations recommended by the Board’s PPT and
included in proposed lEPs. (Ex. 13—24 pp. 24—28)

The Teacher of Student’s Study Skills class at Eagle Hill during 2010-20] 1 described him as
pleasant and cooperative. She recognized his problems with attention, executive functions,
and task initiation. She seated him in a place that helped him avoid distractions. She
encouraged him to use a computer since his handwriting was difﬁcult to read. (Testimony,
Study Skills Teacher, Eagle Hill, Tr. 8/9/2011 pp. 94—96, 102-104, 1 11)

The record of the hearing includes no evidence of contact between the Board and Student’s
family between his enrollment at Eagle Hill in the fall 012009 and a March 7, 201 1 PPT
meeting

The PPT convened on March 7, 2011, with an Assistant Principal at the Middle School,
Mother, Board Special Education Teacher, School Psychologist and S/LP, in attendance.
Two Eagle l'Iill teachers palticipated in the meeting by telephone. Mother signed consents
for release of information about the Student From Eagle Hill School and for a re-evaluation.
The team would i'e—convene after the evaluation was completed (Ex. 13-13; Testimony,
Assistant Principal, T): 12/21/2011 pp. 7-9)

An educational evaluation ol‘Studcnt was performed by a Board Special l,iducation Teacher
on March 14, 201 1. This Teacher reported:
[Student] scored in the average range for the Reading Fluency, Math Fluency and Writing
Fluency (WJ-III), above average range for the Contextual Conventions subtest of the
TOEL-4 and very superior for the Story Composition ofthe T OWL—4. (Ex. 26 pp. 31—33;
Testimony, Board’s Special Education Teacher, Tr. 12/21/201 1 pp. 30—33)

On March 31, 201 1, Student had a Psychological Update by a Board School Psychologist.
The School Psychologist reviewed Student’s records, made a classroom observation at Eagle
Hill School, and gave Behavior Rating Inventory 01‘ Executive Function and Connors-3
Parent Short Form to Parents and to one of Student’s Teachers. This evaluator’s summary:
[Student] is a twelve-year—old boy with a history ot‘ADHD and learning problems.
Ratings by both his parents and his teachers are signiﬁcant for inattention and executive

18

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0412

functioning issues. (Ex. B-26; Testimony, Board‘s School Psychologist, Tr. 12/21/201 1
pp. 48—56)

571 The PPT convened an April 26, 201 1, to seek consent for more testing. Present were:

58.

Middle School Assistant Principal, Mother, an Eagle Hill Teacher by telephone, a Board
Special Education Teacher, School Psychologist and Eagle Hill Teacher/Administrator. The
Eagle Hill staff members reviewed Student’s progress there. Mother signed consent for
testing of executive function, including Parent and Teacher forms. (Ex, B~25; Testimony,
Assistant Principal, Tr. 12/21/2011 pp. 11-12)

The PPT convened on May 20, 201 1. Present were: Middle School Assistant Principal,
Mother, Regular and Special Education Teachers and School Psychologist. The results 01‘ the
observation of Student and his evaluations were reviewed, The Present Levels of Academic
Achievement and Functional Performance were updated based on reports from Student’s
Eagle Hill Teachers:
Academic/Cognitive: Language Arts: Strengths: According to the December 2010
progress reports from [Student’s] current school he has mastered the decoding and
spelling goals. ln isolation he has mastered most ofthe vocabulary goals and
comprehension questions
Concerns/Challcnges/Necds: According to December 2010 progress reports from
[Student’s] current school he still struggles with inferential comprehension questions,
making predictions and summarizing the text.
Impact 0fStudent’s Disability: Due to [Student‘s] difﬁculty maintaining attention and
consistently sustaining his performance, teachers will need to check for understanding
and work in progress.
Other Academic/Nonacademic Areas: Strengths: According to reports from
[Student’s] current school he has begun to make progress towards organizing his
materials with encouragement. He understands his own learning style and applies
strategies that are appropriate for him
Concerns/Challenges/Nceds: [Student] is not completely independent in his ability to
keep his materials organized. [Student] will need help planning long term assignments
that are required in the middle school setting.
Impact of Student’s Disability: Due to [Student’s] difﬁculty maintaining attention and ‘
consistently sustaining his performance, teachers will need to check for understanding
and work in progress.
Social/Emotional: Strengths: Based on information from his current school, [Student]
is noted to have a positive attitude and is an eager participant in classes. He is described
as someone who is often socially engaged and who can empathize with peers. By direct
observation [Student] is a student who is well liked by peers and often socially engaged
throughout the school day
Conccrns/Challenges/Ncedsz According to his teacher reports [Student] still lacks
conﬁdence in his academic skills and may not always self-advocale (especially ask for
help).
Impact of Student’s Disability: Because [Student] has some difﬁculty maintaining
attention and consistently sustaining his performance, teachers will need to check for
understanding and work progress.

19

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

Areas that were marked “Age/Grade Appropriate" were: Academic/Cognitivc: Math;
Communication; Vocalional/Transition; Health and Development — Vision and Hearing; Fine
Motor; Gross Motor and Activities of Daily Living. (Ex. 13—26 pp. 3—5; Testimony, Assistant
Principal, Tr. 12/21/2011 pp. 12-15)

59. Goals for 201 1-2012 proposed at the May 20, 201 1, PPT meeting were:
Goal #1: [Student] will utilize strategies to improve organization.
Goal #2: Given academic Classes [Student] will utilize organizational strategies
necessary 10 complete assignments in a timely manner.
Goal #3: Using a focus checklist [Student] will independently monitor his level 01‘ locus
in class.
Goal #4: Given a passage in his grade level general education classroom [Student] will
read the passage and then answer inferential comprehension questions.
Goal #5: [Student] will demonstrate conﬁdence in his academic performance and
practice self-advocacy. (Ex. B-26 pp. 7—12)

60, Program Modiﬁcations/Accommodations for Student in the May 20, 201 l IEP:
Materials/Books/Equipment: Calculator, Graphic Organizer, Manipulatives for all
classes.

Tests/Quizzes/Timc: Extra time 7 150% May be taken in Alternate Setting for all
classes.

Grading: N0 Handwriting Penalty.

Organization: Post Assignments, Provide Study Outlines, all classes.

Environment: Preferential Seating, all classes.

Behavior Management/Support: Positive Reinforcement. all classes.

Instructional Strategies: Extra Drill and l’raclice, Check Work in Progress, Have
Student Restate information, Multi~Sensory Approach, Provide Models, for all classes.
(Ex. B—26 p. 13)

61. The May 20, 201 1. IE? provided for some accommodations for Student for State and District
Testing. The [BF included Collaborative Support for Language Arts 7.5 x 45 mins/week,
Learning Center 2.5 x 45 mins/week and Counseling 1 x 45 mins/week. Counseling would
be provided both individually and in a group. (Ex. B-26; Testimony, Assistant Principal, Tr.
12/21/2011pp.2,16-21)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1. Section 10—7611, Connecticut General Statutes (C,G.S.), and related regulations at Section 10-
76h, Regulations ol‘Connecticul Slate Agencies (R.C.S.A.), authorize an impartial hearing
ofﬁcer to conduct a special education hearing and to render a ﬁnal decision in accordance with
Sections 4-176e through 4—180a, inclusive, and Sections 4—181a ol‘lhe C.G.S. Section 20 U,S,C.
§ 1415(f) and related regulations at 34 CFR. § 300.511 through § 300.520 also authorize special
education hearings.

20

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0412

2. The federai Individuals with Disabilities Education Act sets forth the procedural requirements
for students who may be in need ot‘spccial education due to one 01‘ more disabilities. At 34
CPR. §300.301(a):
Each public agency must conduct a full and individual initia1 eva1uation, in accordance
with §§ 300.305 and 300.306, before the initial provision of special education and related
services to a child with a disability.
At 34 CPR. §300.300(a), parental consent is required prior to the school district
conducting this eva1uation.

3. The PPT must consider any evaluation that the Parent provides. After a school district
evaluation, parents who disagree with that evaluation may request an independent evaluation at
pub1ic expense (34 CPR. §300.502). In this case, Parents have not requested reimbursement for
any 01‘ the malty evaluations they have shared with the PPT. However, by pre-empting school
evaluations and by early denial ofconsent to school evaluations, they have limited the number
and type 01‘ evaluative tests that have been used with the Student. At 34 CPR. §300.304,
Evaluation Procedures, the requirements for evaluation for special education eligibility are laid
out in great detail.
At 34 C.F.R. §300.304 (e) (4):
The child is assessed in all areas related to the suspected disability, including, it‘
appropriate, health, vision, hearing, social and emotional status, general intelligence,
academic performance, communicative status, and motor abilities[.j

4. The standard for determining whether a free appropriate public education has been offered or
provided to a child who is e1igibie for special education begins with the two-prong test
established by the Supreme Count in Board qua’ucation 0fI/1e Hendrick Hudson Central School
District v. Rowley, 459 US. 176 (1982). First, the procedural requirements of the IDEA must
have been tnet by the school district. Second, the IEP must be reasonab1y calculated to enable
the child to receive some educational beneﬁt.

5. While Parent alleges that early PPT meetings were not procedurally correct, little evidence 01‘
speciﬁc problems was shown. The regulations require at least one PPT meeting each school year
be held for students receiving special education (34 C.F.R. §§300.1 16 (b) (1), 300.324 (a) (4)
and Section 10—76d-11 (b), R.C.S.A.) During the school year 2005—2006, Student’s ﬁrst grade
year, three PPT meetings were held, at least one parent was present at each one, and information
about procedural requirements was provided to Parents, During 2008-2009, six PPT meetings
were held (one carried over to a second day), at least one parent was present at each one and
information was provided about procedural requirements. During 20104201 1, three PPT
meetings were held, at least one parent was present at each one and information was provided
about procedural requirements. The IEPS presented to Parent, based on the information available
to the PPT at the times, were reasonably calculated to enable the Student to receive educational
beneﬁt.

6. When parents have made a unilateral placement of a student requiring special education, and
then request reimbursement from the school district for that placement, the parent must show 1)
that the special education program and placement offered by the public school was not
appropriate to the student’s special education needs and 2) that the unilateral placement was

21

 

 

January 30, 2012 Finai Decision and Order 1 1—0412

appropriate to the Student’s special education needs, in order to secure reimbursement.
Burlington School Cammillee, e! a]. v. Massachusetts Department ofEdz/cation, 471 US. 359,
369-370 (1985). The Board’s PPT offered appropriate programs and placements, based on the
information available to them at the time.

7. Pursuant to Section 10—7611—14, R.C.S,A., while the party who has ﬁled for a hearing has the
burden of going forward, the Board has the burden of proving the appropriateness ot‘Ihe
Student’s program and placement. The Board has met that burden by providing lEPs based on
the information available at the time ()fcach PPT meeting, but the Parents have not consented to
special education placement for Student,

DISCUSSION

Although concerns had been raised about Student starting in 2004, Parents did not consent to a
multi—disciplinary evaluation by professional school staffuntii early in 2008. Because Student
was attending a private school in Stamford at that time, Stamford received a signed consent and
performed the evaluation. At a Stamford I’PT meeting on June 3, 2008, the Stamford PPT found
the Student not eligible for special education.

After Student re—enroiled in the Board’s Elementary School in October, 2008, there were PPT
meetings on October 30 and December 18, 2008: at each Ofthese meetings, classroom
accommodations were instituted to address Student’s problems At a PPT meeting on February
4, 2009, Parent signed a consent for the Board to conduct an evaluation to determine eligibility
for special education, Student’s eligibility was determined at a PPT meeting on April 22, 2009
and an IEP was offered at the meeting’s continuation on April 23, 2009. Parent noted on the
consent form that she consented to the Student’s eligibility for special education but did not
agree with the proposed IE1), A consent to eligibility, which is not required by law, is not
equivalent to a consent to the initial provision of special education, which does require parent
consent. Parent did not sign consent for the initial provision of special education at that meeting,
nor did she sign consent at subsequent PPT meetings on May 7 and June 23, 2009.

It was reported that Student had been identiﬁed as in need 01‘ special education during his
kindergarten year, but neither party to this hearing produced documentation of an early PPT
meeting or parental consent for services. The services provided were described as “under
Section 504” in later records. While Parent argues that procedural errors prevented the Student
from receiving an appropriate and timely special education program, Parent’s lack Ofconsent for
the initial provision of special education was the actual barrier to implementation of an IEP for
Student.

From 2004 to the present, the findings and recommendations of many ofth evaluators, private
professionals and professional school staft‘members in two school districts, were similarx
Without an iEP, Board’s Teachers tried to accommodate his difﬁculties on an informal basis.
One example ot‘the result of this is the problem of Student’s handwriting. Keyboarding is
mentioned in Findings of Fact 23 (6/3/2008 Stamford PPT), 26 (PPT 10/30/2008), 27 (4"‘ grade
teacher), 30 (Board Evaluation 3/2009), 33 (March 2009 Report Card), 44 (OT evaluation

22

 

January 30, 2012 Final Decision and Order 1 1—041 2

6/17/2009), 50 (2/26/2010 psychological evaluation) and 52 (Testimony, Eagle Hill Teacher
2010—201 1). T here is no record of a systematic, individualized effort to help the Student acquire
this skill. Since an IEP is legally binding on the school, there could have been documentation 01‘
instruction provided and the results. If keyboarding was NOT the solution, other alternatives
might have been considered.

The record of the hearing is silent regarding an IEP and placement for 2010—201 1, although there
is no evidence that Student could not have been provided with an appropriate IEP if he had re—
em‘olled in the Board’s Middle School and his Parents had consented to special education
placement.

The various IEPs and placements offered by the Board and rejected by Parents were appropriate
to the special education needs of the Student. While the programs offered at Eagle Hill School
may also have been appropriate, it is not necessary to address a comparison. The Board’s
proposed IEPS and placements were appropriate and would have provided a free appropriate
public education for the Student if his Parents had consented to special education placement.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The lEPs and placements developed by the School for Student for school years 20092010 and
201 1-2012, were appropriate to his identiﬁed special education) needs.

Because Student was not enrolled in the Board’s school during 2010-201 1 and there was no
contact suggesting that he would re—enrol] during that school year, the Board was not required to
prepare an lEP for 2010—201 1‘

Because the Board’s programs have been found appropriate, it is not necessary to address the
appropriateness of the programs provided at Eagle Hill School.

Because the Board’s programs have been found appropriate, no reimbursement ol‘the Eagle Hill
School placement by the School District is ordered.

23

 

 

