October 7, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0530

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Regiona1 School District No, 16

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent [Mother], pro se

Appearing on behalf of the District: Attorney Mark Sommamga
Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Connon, LLC
646 Prospect Ave.

Hartford, CT 06105

Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim

Appearing before:
Hearing Officer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the District failed under child ﬁnd to identify the Student as e1igvib1e for special
education from the 2008—09 school year through January 201 1;

2. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education.

SUMMARY:

The 17 year old Student, currently attending an adult education diploma program, was a
student at the District high school from fall 2008 until he withdrew from school in February
201 1. The Parent brought this action against the District alleging that the District violated child
ﬁnd by failing to identify the Student as eligible for special education. ‘

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The District received this request for hearing on July 11, 2011 [Exhibit H.O.-1] and a preheating
conference convened on July 20, 20111 A mediation session was convened on July 27, 2011

which did not resolve the issues in this case.

October 7, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0530

The hearing convened on one hearing date on September 6, 201 1. A request for extension of the
mailing date of the decision was granted to allow the self-represented Parent and the Board’s
attorney to submit closing argument. Written closing arguments were submitted by both parties

on September 20, 2011‘
The Mother was the sole witness for the Parent during her rebuttal case.

The District’s witnesses were Mark Dandelske, District schooi counselor; Kristine Bums,
District school social worker; Krista Accuosti, District special education teacher and Lynn Cox,

District director ofpupil personnel.

The Parent submitted exhibits numbered A1 to A2, Bla, C1-C3, D1—D14, E1 and F1, which were
entered as full exhibits.

The District submitted exhibits numbered B1 to B150, which were entered as full exhibits.

A11 exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision,

T0 the extent that the procedural history, summary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. v. Ca11a11en

Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD Tex. 1993)

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(“CGS”) §lO-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedures Act (“UAPA”),

CGS §§ 4-176e t0 4-178,ine1usive,§§4-181a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is 17 years old and is currently attending the Shelton Adult Education High
School Diploma Program. [Testimony Director; Stipulation by Parent and District]

2. Prior to his Withdrawal from the District’s school in February 2011,’the Student attended
the District high school from September 2008 when he began his freshman year.

3. During the fall 2008, the Student’s grades were marginal, consisting of a 66 in Hum/SS 9,
a 49 in Hum/Bnglish 9, a 72 in algebra 1, a 69 in E Science, a 79 in Spanish 2 and a 79 in

Intro Trans. [Exhibit B32]

4. In December 2008, the school convened a Student Study Team [“SST”] to address the
academic concerns for the Student. [Testimony School Counselor, Exhibit B—36] At this

October 7, 201 l Final Decision and Order 11-0530

10.

SST, it was decided that the Student would stay after school to work with his English and
earth science teacher, that the teachers would use tactile cues to focus the Student’s
attention, that the Student would have preferential seating, that he would use his agenda
to note homework, and that he would research school clubs. The Parent and Student
were present at this meeting, as well as the school counselor, another counselor, the vice~
principal and the English teacher. The Parent agreed to these intewentions, which were
provided to the Student. [Testimony School Counselor, Exhibit B36]

Initially, the Student’s grades improved after these interventions were put into place. In
the second quarter, the Student’s grades in all of his academic classes included an 83 in
Hum/SS9, a 65 in Hum/Engl 9, a 90 in Algebra 1, a 76 in earth science, a 90 in Spanish 2
and an 82 in Intro Trans. [Testimony School Counselor, Exhibit B32]

The Student maintained his progress during the third quarter of ninth grade, but his
grades dropped again in the fourth quaiter 0f the 2008-09 school year. [Exhibit B32]
Teacher emails from this time period also note poor progress in the classroom, an
inability to answer simple questions when asked and a student who stluggles to stay
focused in class. One of the Student’s teachers noted on April 30, 2009 that “in terms of
behavior, he is easily distracted by other students, spends too much time talking, trying to
text or listen to his iPod and often puts his head down on his desk, When we are doing
work as a class the paper often sits there untouched. . . . 1 can ‘I truly assess his ability vs.
his lack of eﬂort or interest. " [Exhibits D9 to D13]

The Student was absent 9 days, tardy 5 days and dismissed on one day during the 2008-
09 school year. [Exhibit B33] The Student discipline report for the 2008-09 school year
included ﬁve incidents which resulted in detentions for inappropriate behavior [picking
on another student, marking up a locker and throwing something across a room] and
detentions for cutting class. There were no incidents in the ﬁrst half of the school year;
all of these disciplinary referrals occun‘ed from January to June 2009. [Exhibit B34, B35]

No evidence was submitted or testimony presented that the Student Study Team
reconvened at any other point during the Student’s 2008-09 school year, or at any time

thereafter.

On August 5, 2009, the Parent submitted the Health Assessment Record to the District.
On the form, the Parent noted memory problems as an issue that impacts the Student and
also noted that the Student was prescribed Zoloft, an antidepressant. [Exhibit D14] N0
District staff followed up with the Parent regarding the information provided in the
Health Assessment Record, which is kept in the ﬁles in the nurse’s offices [Testimony

School Counselor, School Social Worker]

In the ﬁrst quarter of the 2009~lO school year, the Student’s grades were again
unsatisfactory His ﬁrst quarter grades included an F for advisory, a 66 for Hum/His 10,
a 30 for Hum/Eng l0, a 39 for Geometry, a 47 for biology and a 66 for Spanish. [Exhibit

B42]

October 7, 2011

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Final Decision and Order 11-0530

During the 2009—10 school year the Student’s disciplinary referrals increased. These
referrals included incidents of smoking at school, cutting class, tardiness and
disrespectful behavior to a substitute teacher. These incidents resulted in 18 detentions
and three in—school suspensions. [Exhibits B48 through B49]

During the 2009—10 school year, the Student was absent from school while he attended a
program at Children’s Center of Hamden Drug Rehabilitation, from March 17, 2010
through April 26, 2010. He returned to school in April 2010, and a “Welcome Back”
meeting was convened. It was decided that the school counselor would meet with the
Student regularly to review how he was doing upon his return to school, [Testimony

School Counselor; Exhibits B37, B43]

When the Student returned from the substance abuse rehabilitation center, the school
counselor testiﬁed that that he was doing very well with his academic work. [Testimony
School Counselor] The Student’s fourth quarter grades, however, continued to be
unsatisfactory, with a 76 in Hum/His 10, a 71 in Hum/Eng 10, a 54 in Geometry, a 33 in

Biology and a 63 in Spanish. [Exhibit 8-42]

During the 2009-10 school year, the Student received counseling from the School Social
Worker, who met with him 12 times during that school year. [Testimony School Social

Worker, Exhibit D1]

During the summer of 2010, the Student attended Arms Acres, a residential adolescent
substance abuse program. [Exhibit Bla]

The 2010-11 school year again began very poorly for the Student. His ﬁrst quarter
grades for his academic classes were all unsatisfactory and included a 32 in Hum/His 1 1,
a 65 in Civics, a 43 in Hum/Eng 10, a 45 in Bas Al 11 and a 40 in biology. [Exhibit B77]

On October 29, 2010, the Student received an external suspension for possession of drug
paraphernalia in school. Prior to that suspension, the Student’s disciplinary actions
continued to escalate. In the ﬁrst two months of school, the Student received twenty
disciplinary actions resulting in detentions and three in school suspensions. His
disciplinary referrals were for cutting classes, smoking in school, failure to serve
detention, tardiness, dress code violations, disrespectful behavior to staff member,

inappropriate behavior and cell phone usage. [Exhibit B64]

The Student received educational services at Bridgeport Detention Center from
November 12, 2010 to November 23, 2010. [Testimony School Counselor; Exhibits B61,

B70, B71]

Upon his departure from Bridgeport Detention Center, the Student was hospitalized at the
Riverview Hospital for Children and Youth from November 23, 2010 to on or about
December 21, 2010. His discharge diagnosis was depressive disorder nos, cannabis
dependence, opiates abuse and parent—child relational problems. Axis IV of his discharge
diagnosis includes “Divorce of parent[s] (2004); death of friend in motor vehicle

October 7, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11~053O

accident; legal problems; school problems (in spite of good cognitive endowment)” His
Axis V GAF was 451 [ExhibitB115]

20. After the discharge from Riverview, the Student was admitted to the Child and
Adolescent Behavioral Health Program at Waterbury Hospital. At the time of his
admission his diagnosis was depression nos, cannabis dependence and parent child
relational problem. His Axis IV strcssors included problems with primary support,
educational and legal, and his cuITent GAF was 47. This information was provided in a
report from Waterbury Hospital dated January 5, 201 1. [Exhibit B72]

21. During the 20101 1 school year, a “Welcome Back” meeting was convened on December
20, 2010, when the Student was discharged from Riverview Hospital. The Student, the
Vice Principal, the Father and the School Counselor met, and an action plan was set up to
have the Student check in with the Vice Principal every morning and the school
counselor once per week. [Testimony School Counselor, Exhibit B41]

22. On January 6, 2011, the District convened a 504 Meeting and found the Student eligible
for 504 accommodations based on the January 5, 2011 diagnosis received from Samaria
Massound, LMFT of Waterbury Hospital Child and Adolescent Behavioral Health.
Based on the depression diagnosis, the District provided accommodations to the Student

[Testimony School Counselor; Exhibits B73, B74]1

2”. The District’s listed accommodations for the Student’s 504 plan included (1) drop
chemistry and add skills lab and/or structured study hall, (2) ICAPS starts next week, (3)
preferential seating, (4) provide only essential material to the Student for g1ading, (5)
modify midterms to cover essential material, (6) teachers will use tactile dcues to bring the
Student back to focus, (7) the Student will receive an incomplete for 2rld marking period
until work 13 all made up for each class. [Exhibit B74]

24. At the conclusion of the 2"d quarter which ended around January 20, 2011, in his
academic classes the Student received a 68 in Hum/His 11, a 22 in Civics, a 68 in
Hum/Bng 10, a 67 in Bas Alg H and a 67 in Biology. [Testimony School Counselor,

Exhibit B77]

25, On February 17, 2011, the Student was withdrawn from the District schools because the
Student was moving in with his Father who resided in a different school district.
[Testimony School Counselor, Exhibit B78] He subsequently enrolled in the Shelton
Adult Education High School Diploma Program.

' It is contradictory for the District to assert in this proceeding the claim that the Student‘s decline was related solely
to substance abuse, and then to have the District ﬁnd the Student eligible for Section 504 accommodations in
January 201], as under Section 504, a student who is engaged in the illegal use of drugs is not considered a
“qualiﬁed individual with a disability” and, therefore, not covered under Section 504, 29 USC §705(20)(B) By the
District’s actions it can be concluded that the disabling condition of depression was separate and apart from the

substance abuse.

 

October 7, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0530

26‘ During the time that the Student was attending the District’s school, his school social
worker noted that his grades would decrease when he would have admissions to various
programs and when he was in the Bridgepott Juvenile Detention Center He had three
admissions for substance abuse Violations at Bridgepott Juvenile Detention Center, and
received services at The Children’s Center of Hamden for substance abuse, Arms Acres
(a residential adolescent substance abuse center), as well as Morris Foundation,
Waterbury Hospital and Riverview Hospital. [Testimony School Social Worker, Exhibit
Bia] The exhibits submitted do not support the conclusion that his academic decline
could solely be attributed to substance abuse. Riverview Hospital is not a substance
abuse treatment facility; it is a mental health facility and inpatient hospital for
adolescents [Testimony School Social Worker] Moreover, his academic progress was in
decline prior to the timeframe that the Student was involved in substance abuse. [Exhibit

B32, B42]2

27. While the Student was under his 504 plan, he was placed in the skills lab, at smaller
version of a study hall with more opportunity for one to one attention. The Student was
placed in the skills lab so that the teacher could ensure that he was on task and for
organizational support. In the skills lab, the Student never accepted the special education
teacher’s offers to help out, did not request modiﬁcation of his homework and completed
his homework on his own. The Special Education Teacher did not see the Student
struggling with any issues of focus in this small setting. [Testimony Special Education
Teacher] His grades continued to be very unsatisfactory despite these interventions.

[Exhibit 13-77]

28, The Parent did not request an evaluation of the Student, nor did she request special
education for the Student while the Student was attending the District’s school.

[Testimony Director]

29. Nevertheless, the Parent was frequently in contact with the District about her concerns for
the Student throughout the time the Student was attending the District high school. For
example, in an email on November 10, 2009, during the Student’s sophomore year, the
Parent wrote to the assistant principal of the high school: “I would greatly appreciate any
wisdom, advice, or guidance you, or Dr. F rank may have that I have not already received
ﬁ‘om his Counselor, Psychiatrist, Law Enforcement, WRHS, my family and my Church. I
am completelyﬁ‘ustra/ed and very concernedfar [ the Student ’3] well being and his future
, i . if there are any sources ofhelp that 1 am not currently pursuing (above) please let me
know. . . . 1 thank you far your concern for my son and hope that you will share anything
that might be helpful in helping [ the Student] both personally and academically, “ '
[Exhibit D6] These emails seeking help for the Student relate back to the beginning of
the Student’s freshman year, when the Parent emailed the school counselor that she

2 The testimony of the School Social Worker was incomplete and unhelpful in that oﬂentimes she refused to answer
questions or discuss the basis for her conclusions that she didn't feel the Student was self-medicating or that his
decline could be attributed to substance abuse. She offered very little information as she felt it was conﬁdentiai
information she could not divulge. Based on the exhibits submitted, however, there is a compelling body of
information that supports the conclusion that the Student’s decline predated the substance abuse. He had been at
goal in his earlier CMT in 4'" grade [Exhibit BIZ], but by 6"", 7‘h and 8m grade, he was no longer meeting goal in all
areas, dropping to the basic level in reading by 8'“ grade. [Exhibits 1317, B22, B29]

6

October 7, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0530

“would like to remind allparlies involved that [the Student] has had meMwa/relemz‘mi
problems throughout his school years, likely as a result Ofmeningitz‘s at 7 weeks ofage,
lead exposure as a toddler, or both (per his pediatrician). I am hoping Ihat, together, we
can arrange the help he needs to succeed ” [Exhibit D8]

30, From the Student’s freshmen year unti1 the Student was withdrawn from the school in
January 201 1, the school counselor had frequent telephone conversations with the Parent
More than 50 voice mail messages were returned by the Sch001 Counselor, and additional
phone calls were answered about the Student. [Testimony School Counselor] Through
these contacts, and the additional emails and contact to other school personnel, the
District had ample information that this Student had substantial need for additional
interventions and was a Student in need of a referral for a special education evaluation.

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Parent brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act [IDEA] which provides for specia1 education and related services to chi1dren with
disabihties, from birth through age 21. Students who are identiﬁed as eligible fer special
education are entit1ed to receive a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) pursuant to

state and federal laws. & Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 1076 et. seq.; the Individuals with Disabilities

Education Act (1135A), 20 U.S.C. § 1401, et seq.

A local education agency has a “Child Find” 0b1igation under IDEA, which is a duty to
identify, locate and evaluate children who have a disability or who are suspected of having a
disabihty. A.P. V. Woodstock Board of Education, 572 F. Supp. 2d 221, 50 IDELR 275
(D.Connt 2008), citing 20 U.S.C. §1412(a)(4)(A) Students who are suspected of having a
disability and who are in need of special education and related services are referred to a planning

and placement team (PPT), which p1ans for an evaluation to determine whether the Student is a

child with a disability under the IDEA. Id.

The eva1uation must be comprehensive, ensuring that the student “is assessed in all areas

related to the suspected disability, inc1uding, if appropriate, health, Vision, hearing, social and

October 7, 2011 Final Decision and Order 11—0530

emotional status, general intelligence, academic performance, communicative status, and motor
abilities.” 34 CFR §300.304 (c)(4) In accordance with state regulations, provision shall be made
for the prompt referral to a planning and placement team (PPT) of all children who have been
suspended repeatedly or whose behavior, attendance or progress in school is considered
unsatisfactory or at a marginal level ofacceptance. Regs. Conn. Agencies §10-76d-7

Ifthe Student is found to be a child with a disability, the PPT develops an individualized
education program (IEP) for the Student. 1d,

Child Find is an afﬁrmative obligation A parent is not required to request that a district
identify and evaluate a child, and a parent’s failure to make such a request does not relieve the
district of its child ﬁnd obligation. Robertson County School System v, King, 24 IDELR 1036 {6m
Cir, 1996) The Parent in this case asserts that the District failed in its child ﬁnd obligation. A
parent need not request a referral or an evaluation to trigger this obligation. No magic words
need be spoken. The Parent sought help repeatedly as the Student was failing The SST never :
reconvened, the grades continued to be unsatisfactory,the disciplinary referrals escalated and the
District allowed the Student to fall through the cracks.

While it is appropriate to attempt interventions prior to referral for evaluation for special
education, the District failed to take the steps necessary when the intewentions were not working
for this Student and while he continued to fail.

A student who is diagnosed with depression-or is prescribed antidepressants will not
automatically be found eligible for special education. Mere diagnosis does not result in
eligibility. But a Student who is diagnosed with depression or prescribed antidepressants, who is
also receiving unsatisfactory grades, disciplinary referrals, teacher reports of poor classroom

performance and focus issues, along with the failure 0fthe SST interventions should be referred

October 7, 2011 Final Decision and Order 1 1-0530

for a special education evaluation, The District staff was well aware as early as the summer of
2009 and earlier that the Student was struggling. The Parent had frequent communication to the
District about her concerns. Emails from as early as the fourth qualter of the 2008—09 school
year document teachers’ concerns that the Student could not focus, was easily distracted, was
making poor progress in the classroom and was unable to answer simple questions. The District

should have responded by referring the Student for an evaluation.

Not all diagnoses result in identiﬁcation, Moreover, substance abuse is not a disabling
condition under IDEA‘ The depression, however, did adverser affect the Student’s educational
performance. The Student’s mood, behavior and academic problems did not relate solely to his
substance abuse. With such a long record of poor grades and inconsistency, the child ﬁnd

responsibilities were triggered but ignored. There were a number of times when the District

failed to follow up with the Student as he continued to fail.

A person who is a substance abuser may be eligible as emotionally disturbed if, without
consideration of the drug abuse and the resulting behavior, he meets the criteria of 34 CFR

300.8(c)(4) Emotional Disturbance under IDEAT That criteria is:

"a condition exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics over a
longperiod 0ftime and to a marked degree that adversely aﬂects a child ‘3
educational performance:

(A) an inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual, sensory
0r healthfactors.

(B) An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal
relationships with peers and teachers.

(C) Inappropriate types afbehavior orfeeh'ngs under normal
circumstancest

(D) A general pervasive mood ofunhappiness or depression.

(E) A tendency to develop physical symptoms orfears associated with
personal or schoolproblems.

October 7, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 11—0530

The Student did have a general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression over a long
period of time to a marked degree that did adversely affect his educational performance which
both predated and continued through his later substance abuse issues. The Student was
ultimately hospitalized for mental health, not substance abuse reasons. He has been under the
care of a psychiatrist for years and continued to struggle with depression throughout this time.

The District failed to take the appropriate steps to refer the Student for evaluation and
ﬁnd him eligible for special education while the Student’s academics continued to decline.
Eventually the Student withdrew from school and enrolled in an adult education school diploma
program. This result is one that should have been avoided and is why child ﬁnd is such an
important obligation for school districts.

The Student is entitled to a comprehensive evaluation and compensatory education as a
remedy for the District’s failure in its child ﬁnd obligations, in its failure to refer the Student for
evaluation, and its failure to find the Student eligible for special education and related services.

In the request for due process, the resolution of this matter sought by the Parent included
restitution of lost credits, protection of the Student’s legal rights as well as for other students who
may not be receiving the educational modiﬁcations due to School/Administration oversight and
sanctions and oversight of Region 16 adherence to the laws. Much of what the Parent is seeking
is not a remedy in a due process case, but could possibly be a remedy in a complaint filing or
another forum.

In this case, the Student was not provided an evaluation; therefore he is entitled to a
comprehensive evaluation by a Connecticut licensed neuropsychologist or Connecticut licensed
psychologist selected by the Parent, In addition, ifthe psychologist determines it is necessary

and appropriate to have a psychiatric evaluation, then the District shall also fund a psychiatric

10

October 7, 20H Final Decision and Order 11-0530

evaluation by a Connecticut licensed psychiatrist. The completed evaluation shall include
appropriate educational recommendations for the Student.

The Student is no longer a student in the District. Nevettheless, the District must provide
the Student with restoration of the credits that he did not eam while he was enrolled as a student
in the District. To enable him to gain these credits, the Student is entitled to tutoring to be
provided to him for the failure of the District to evaluate, ﬁnd him eligible for special education
and provide him with an appropriate education, The Student shall receive 10 hours per week of
tutoring by a Connecticut licensed teacher who is qualified to teach high school subjects. The
tutoring shall be provided for a total of 32 weeks. The Board shall provide a list of qualiﬁed
tutors from which the Parent can select the appropriate tutor[s]. The tutoring shall be provided
either in the Region 16 area or in the Connecticut location of the Father if the Student is currently
residing with the Father. The tutoring shall be directed at enabling the Student to receive the
education that the District failed to provide to the Student and the District shall provide the
Student ﬁlll restoration of all credits upoh completion of the tutoring.

If the Student returns to the District, the District would have the obligation to convene a
PPT meeting and develop an IEP for the Student. The tutoring ordered as compensatory
education in this decision would be above and beyond the special education and related services
that this District, or any other Board, would be obligated to provide the Student under its

obligation to provide a free appropriate public education to a Student who is eligible for special

education.

11

 

October 7, 201 1 Fina1 Decision and Order 11~053O

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

1. The Board fai1ed under child ﬁnd to identify the Student as eligible for special education
from the 2009—10 schoo1 year through February 2011 when the Student withdrew from
the District,

2. While the Student was enrolled at the Board schools, the Student was eligible for special
education under the category of Emotional Disturbance.

3, The Student is entitled to compensatory education, which shall include a comprehensive

evaluation as quy outlined in this decision as well as 10 hours per week of tutoring for a
total of 32 weeks as outlined in this decision.

12

 

