STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

February 3, 201 1 1 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0207

Student vi Westport Board ofEducation
Appearing on behalfof the Parents: Pro se

Appearing on behalf ofthe Board: Attorney Marsha Behnan Moses, Berchem, Moses & Devlin,
RC, 75 Broad St., Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:
1, Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2010-1 1 school year was
appropriate.

2. If not, whether the Parents’ placement of the Student at Eagle Hill is appropriate.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

This hearing request was submitted to the Department of Education, but the Board attorney did
not receive the request for hearing until the date of the prehearing conference on December 6,

2010.
The parties submitted this case for mediation, which was unsuccessful.

On the ﬁrst hearing date, the Parents were not present. The hearing convened, and the Board
was directed to contact the Parents to ascertain if they were going to appear at the hearing Aﬁer
several attempts, the Board was able to reach the Father who reported that he thought the
advocate had notiﬁed the Board and the hearing ofﬁcer that he wanted to withdraw the hearing
request without prejudice. No such notiﬁcation was received.

The Father submitted a notice via email while the hearing ofﬁcer and Board attorney and staff
were still at the hearing. That notiﬁcation indicated that he did “not want to pursue a hearing at
this time, without prejudice.”

The Board attorney urged the hearing ofﬁcer to dismiss the case with prejudice, as the Board had
expended substantial costs and time in preparation for the hearing, including meeting with staff,
preparing the exhibits and appearing at the hearing.

February 3, 201 1 2 Final Decision and Order 1 1—0207

Although the Board has no doubt expended money and time in preparation for the hearing, this
was the ﬁrst request for hearing ﬁled by the pro se Parents and the Parents failed to appear on the
ﬁrst day of hearing. A dismissal with prejudice would be too severe of a penalty for Parents who
may have merely received inappropriate advice from an advocate. The Parents are cautioned,
however, that nonappearance at a hearing 01' other failure to prosecute a re-ﬁled claim could
potentially result in a dismissal with prejudice in the future. Regs. Conn. Agences § 10—76h-18.

This matter is dismissed without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

