November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120480

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Windsor Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Mother, Pro Se
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander A. Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin LLC

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06102

Appearing before: Attorney Am F . Bird, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Does the Student require extended day services in order to receive a free appropriate public
education (FAPE)?

2. If so, did the Board of Education (BOE) offer the Student appropriate extended day services during
the relevant time?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Windsor Board of Education (BOB) received the Student’s Request for Impartial Special Education
Hearing, dated June 7, 2012, on June 13, 2012. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on June
12, 2012. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on June 29, 2012. The Student’s mother
appeared on behalf of the Student, Pro Se, and Attorney Leander Dolphin appeared on behalf of the
BOE. A hearing was scheduled to take place on August 9, 2012.

On June 22, 2012, the BOB ﬁled a timely Motion to Dismiss and Sufﬁciency Challenge. On July 2,
2012, the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the BOE’s Sufﬁciency Challenge, but allowed the Student
leave to amend. On July 6, 2012, the Student submitted an Amended Request for Impartial Special

Education Hearing (Amended Request).

The Student did not appear for the hearing on August 9, 2012. During a telephone call on that day, the
Student requested that the matter be continued and funher hearing dates scheduled, The request was

granted, and further hearings were scheduled.

The timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in this case were extended with the
consent of the panties in order to accommodate the hearing dates and mailing of the ﬁnal decision and
order, The deadline for completing the hearing and mailing the ﬁnal decision and order is November

16,2012.

November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0480

Conﬁdential evidentiary hearings were conducted on September 20, 21 and 24, 2012. The Student and
the BOE each had a full opportunity to present testamentary and documentary evidence and to cross-
examine the other’s witnesses. The Student and the BOE submitted written closing arguments on

October 26, 20121

The Hearing Ofﬁcer admitted Exhibits HO<1 through HO~5 as full exhibits. The Student submitted
Student Exhibits S—1 through S~8; 0fthese S—1 and 8—7 were admitted as full exhibits. The Board’s
Exhibits B-1 through B—48 were all admitted as full exhibits. In addition, the Student called Dr. Karen
Lapienski and herself as witnesses. The Board called Angela Ehrenweith, Joanne Craig—Neison, Cindy
Mansigian, Alla Riley, Christina Burns and J Ody Lefkowitz as witnesses.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Impanial Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law, The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law set fetth herein, which refer to certain
exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supporting evidence in the record. All
admitted evidence was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent that the summary, procedural
history and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice
versa. Bonnie Ann F. V. Ca1a11en Independent School Board. 835 F.Supp. 340 (S.D1Tex. 1993); §A§
Institute Inc. v. S. & H. Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816 (M.D.Tenni 1985).

SUMMARY:

The Student is a nine-year-old male with multiple and signiﬁcant disabilities, including substantial
cognitive deﬁcits. He claimed entitlement to extended day services in order for his program to satisfy
the standard as a free appropriate public education. The evidence presented to the Student’s Planning
and Placement Team (PPT) and at this hearing, however, did not show that the Student’s program was
inappropriate or that the Student needed extended year sewices in order to receive FAPEi

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 10-7611
(CGS §) and related regulations, 20 United States Code Section 1415(f) (20 USC §) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act, CGS §§ 4-176e to 4—

178, inclusive, § 4-181a and § 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering the evidence presented, including documentary evidence and testimony of witnesses, 1
ﬁnd the following facts:

1. The Student is a nine-year—old male in the ﬁfth grade. He resides in Windsor, Connecticut with his
mother. (Board Exhibit 36)(B—36)

24 The Student is identiﬁed as a student eligible to receive special education and related services
under the disability category ofMultiple Disabilities. (B-36). Signiﬁcant global developmental
delays were observed at birth, and the Student has been receiving interventional educational

 

November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120480

10.

11.

12.

services since infancy, More recently, he has been described as having a signiﬁcant intellectual
disability as well as a chromosomal disorder. He also suffers from seizures, (B—3; B—7)

The Student attended an Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) pre-school program at the BOE’s
Roger Walcott School. He then moved to the BOE’s ABA program at Poquonock School for his
ﬁrst grade through the middle of fourth grade (Testimony of Ehrenwerth)

The BOE’s ABA program provided individual learning and behavior services using discrete trial
instruction (Testimony of Ehrenwerth)

The BOB conducted the Student’s triennial evaluation in 2010. The process included
psychological, educational, occupational and physical therapy and speech—language evaluations as
well as a social developmental histow. (B-3; B-4; B-S; B—7; B-8; B—9; B-42)

The Student’s intellectual and adaptive functioning was repolted to be in the Signiﬁcantly Below
Average range. He has signiﬁcant needs in the areas of behavior, communication, ﬁne and gross
motor skills and socialization His adaptive skills are in the Extremely Low range of functioning

(B—7; Testimony of Ehrenwenh)

The Student requires constant supewision and redirection. He can be a “nightmare” at home. His
mother reports that he is aggressive and frequently has tantrums at home — screaming, throwing
things and hitting others — and that these behaviors are getting worse as he gets older and stronger.
(B-3; Testimony ofMother; Testimony of Lapienski)

The BOE also conducted a Functional Behavioral Assessment (F BA) in September 2010. Using
the FBA, the BOE then developed a Behavior Intervention Plan (ET?) for the Student to address
target behaviors observed at school, including grounding disruption and aggression. (B—l6;
Testimony of Craig-Nelson)

The Student’s mother sought and obtained Voluntary Services from the State of Connecticut
Department of Children and Families in January 201 1 to assist her with managing his behavior at

home. (Testimony of Mother)

The Student made progress in his educational program for the 2010-201 1 School Year. He
mastered or made satisfactory progress on nearly all goals. (B—14; B~20; B—43; Testimony of
Riley; Testimony of Craig-Nelson)

The Student’s progress included behavior improvement during the 2010—201 1 School Year, as
there was a steady decrease in target behaviors monitored in his BlP, (B—14; B~16; Testimony of

Craig—Nelson)

The Student’s mother told the PPT on May 31, 2011, that the State of Connecticut Department of
Developmental Services (DDS) would fund the Student’s attendance at the Extended Day Program
(EDP) at River Street School for three days each week beginning in August2011. (B-14)

November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0480

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19,

20.

21.

22.

The BOE voluntarily agreed to provide transpoﬁation for the Student to and from the River Street
School EDP and later from the EDP to his home, even though the EDP was never part of the
Student’s Individualized Education Program (IEP), (B—IS; B-34)

The Student began attending the EDP at River Street School for three days per week in September,
201 1, He usually does not return to his home until about after 7:00 pm. on the days he attends the

EDP. (B-21)

Although the River Street School EDP focuses on some of the goals and objectives contained in
the Student’s IEP, the EDP does not provide the Student with specially designed instruction in his

academic areas. (B32)

The frequency and severity of the Student’s target behaviors during the school day spiked in
September 201 1, when the EDP at the River Street School was introduced for three days per week
under DDS funding. (B—22; B-23; Bu25; Testimony of Craig-Nelson).

Although the Student continued to make academic progress in September and October of 201 1, his
PPT recommended a change of placement to a more restrictive, out-of—district program in order to
meet his intensifying behavioral needs. His mother did not object to the change, and provided
consent for the new placement. (B-25; B-26; B—29; Testimony of Ehrenwerth; Testimony of

Leﬂ<0witz)

As a result of the PPT recommendation, the Student’s placement was changed to River Street
School in Windsor, Connecticut, in January 2012. (B25; B—29; Testimony of Mansigian) River
Street School is a special education public schoo1 program operated by a regional education
service center. It focuses on functional academics, functional activities, independent living skills

and socialization and communication skills. (Testimony of Mansigian)

The Student made a smooth transition to River Street School in January 2012. (B-32) His
behavior improved during January and Febmary 2012, and he was making educational progress.

(B-31; B-32; B—33)

At a PPT meeting on December 19, 201 1, the Student’s mother asked DCF, and then the BOE, to
fund another two days of the River Street School EDP for her son. DCF denied the request, but the

BOE agreed to revisit the issue at a later date, (B—29)

At a February 13, 2012 PPT meeting, the Student’s mother again asked that the BOE ﬁmd two
days per week of EDP at the River Street School. In evaluating this request, the PPT reviewed
data showing that the Student’s behavior had improved since entering River Street School, and that
he was making progress in his educational program. (B-31; Testimony of Mansigian)

The data also demonstrated that the Student did not regress in his acquisition of skills but instead
retained skills that he learned. Nor did there appear to be any difference in the Student’s
performance or behavior on the days that he attended the EDP, compared to the days that he did
not attend. (B—3 1; B—32; B—33; Testimony ot‘Ehrenwerth; Testimony ofMansigian; Testimony of

Leﬂ<owitz)

November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0480

231

24.

25.

26.

27.

28,

29.

DDS later increased its funding to aIlow the Student to attend the EDP every school day of the
week, beginning in March 2012, (B35)

Again, when the Student began attending the River Street School EDP every school day of the
week, his target behaviors spiked during the school day. (B-38; Testimony of Craig-Nelson;
Testimony of Riley)

DDS has not threatened to stop funding the Student’s EDP. (Testimony of Mother)

The Student made progress in his educational program during the 201 1-2012 Schoo1 Year as a
whole, making satisfactoxy progress in most one ofhis goals. (B—3 1; B—32; B83; B-37; B-3S;
Testimony of Craig-Nelson; Testimony of Riley)

The Student’s IEPS for the 2010-201 1 and 201 1-2012 SchooI Years provided for extended year
services during the summer break They did not provide for extended day services during the
school yeart (B-S; B~14; B-29; B-31; B~36)

The Student’s IEP for the 2010-201 1 School Year was reasonably calculated to allow the Student
to make meaningful academic and behavioral progress. (B-S; B~14)

The Student’s IEP for the 201 1-2012 School Year was also reasonably calculated to allow the
Student to make meaningful academic and behavioral progress. (B=14; B~25; B—29; B-31)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1‘

There is no dispute that the Student suffers from disabling conditions that qualify him to receive
special education and related services fmm the Windsor BOE under state and federal law CGS §§
10-76a get $39.; 20 USC §§ 1401 gt ﬁg. Accordingly, the BOE is legally required to provide the
Student with FAPE, including adherence to all procedural requirements and safeguards.

There is no claim that the BOE failed to honor any procedural requirement or safeguard in this
case,

It was the BOE’s burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the IEP provided to the
Student met the requirements of FAPEi Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (RSCA) § 10-

76h—14(a),

The standard for determining whether the BOE met its burden, and that the IEP offers FAPE, is
two—fold, First, the BOE must show that it has followed all procedural requirements in connection
with identiﬁcation and evaluation of the Student and development and implementation of the
Student’s IEPT Second, the BOB must show that the IEP is reasonably calculated to enable the
Student to receive meaningful educational beneﬁt. Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson
Central School District V. Rowley, 458 U.Si 176 (1982) (RowleV); Mrs. B. vi Milford Board of
Education, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120 (2d Cir. 1997),

 

November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0480

101

11,

Signiﬁcantly, the BOE’s obligation is not to provide the best educational program possible for the
Student or to maximize the Student’s educational progress, but only to provide a program that is
likely to produce progress, not regression. Mrs. B. v. Milford Board ofEducation, 103 F.3d 1 1 14,

1121 (2d Cir. 1997).

A BOB must offer extended services when such services are necessary in order for a student to
receive FAPE, 34 CFR § 300,106, “Extended year services” for this purpose include extended
day services, or educational services that extend beyond the regular school day. (71 FR 46582

(2006))

The Connecticut Department of Education maintains that consideration of extended year sewices
involves both a “regression/recoupment criteria” and “nonregression criteria”, The factors to
consider in this analysis include:

(a) The nature or severity ot‘the student’s disability; (b) [Whether] the student is likely to
lose critical skills or fail to recover these skills within a reasonable time as compared to
typical students; (0) The student’s progress in the areas ot’leaming crucial to attaining
self—sufﬁciency and independence from caretakers); ((1) [Whether] the student’s
stereotypic, ritualistic, aggressive or self—injurious interfering behaviors prevent the
student from receiving some educationa1 beneﬁt from the program during the schoo1
year; or (e) Other special circumstances identiﬁed by the IEP team such as: the ability of
the student to interact with other non-disabled students; the areas of the student’s
curriculum that need continuous attention; the student’s vocational needs; or the
availabihty of a1ternative resources

(Topic Brief, Connecticut State Department of Education, March 15, 2007)

In this case, the evidence demonstrated that the Student’s IEP for both the 2010-20] 1 and 201 1—
2012 School Years were reasonably calculated to, and actualIy did, produce meaningﬁﬂ progress
in the Student’s academic and behavioral skills. These IEPs, therefore, offered the Student FAPE
as they were written, even though they did not incIude extended services after the school day.

Moreover, the evidence did not estabhsh that the Student tended to regress in his learning, required
atypical time for recoupment of learning, or that his disabling conditions, behaviors or any special
circumstances required that he receive extended school day services.

Although the Student’s mother testiﬁed that she does not believe the school’s reports of her son’s
progi'ess on his goals and objectives, she did not produce persuasive evidence to support her claim
that the school’s reports were inaccurate

The mother testiﬁed, for instance, that her son did not replicate some of the skills the school
reported he had mastered in school at home. She did not, however, articulate speciﬁc examples of
such ski11s inaccurately reported as mastered or provide documentation ofher claim. Indeed, since
both the BOE’s staff and River Street School staff reported and testiﬁed to the Student’s progress
in his goals and objectives, acceptance of the mother’s claim would require the Hearing Ofﬁcer to

 

November 16, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0480

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

ﬁnd that many individuals essentially falsiﬁed the Student’s records over a long period of time,
including before this controversy arose, There was insufﬁcient evidence to suppoxt such a ﬁnding.

The Student’s special education teacher at River Street School cited speciﬁc examples of the
Student’s progress on his IEP goals. She reported that at the end of the 201 1-2012 School Year,
the Student was able to count out nine items of a larger set, and that he could wait for 35 seconds
before taking his tum. (B38) The Student’s mother did not refute these speciﬁc claims.

The Student’s mother also argued that her son was coached or assisted excessively by school staff
in performing skills during assessments, such as buttoning his sweater. Yet, a student’s
performance of any panicular skill may properly be assessed as “assisted” or as “independent.” In
the end, there was little or no credible evidence to contradict the recorded assessments of both
BOE and River Street School staff showing the Student’s progress on his goals and objectives.

Nor can the Student’s overall academic or behavioral progress be attributed to the fact that he did
palticipate in the River Street School EDP for three days, and then ﬁve days, per week. First, the
evidence demonstrated that the Student’s behavior deteriorated with both the initial introduction of
the EDP in September 201 1 and again when the EDP was increased from three to ﬁve days per
week in March 2012. Second, although the River Street School EDP attended to some of the
Student’s behavior goals and objectives, it did not include special education instruction in the
academic areas outlined in the Student’s IEP. T hese facts strongly suggest that the EDP did not
contribute to the Student’s recorded success in his IEP.

Signiﬁcantly, neither the professional that the Student’s mother brought to the hearing nor any
other professional testiﬁed that the IEP was not reasonably calculated to produce meaningful
educational beneﬁt or that an extended school day was necessary in order for the Student to
receive FAPE. While the Student’s witness and others did testify that the Student requires
constant supervision, supewision and educational services are not the same thing. The BOE is not

1ega11y required to ﬁind supervision.

This Student’s disabilities are profound. His progress has been, and likely will continue to be,
slower than anyone would like. However, his mother’s belief that for such a needy student, more
services are better than fewer services, was not born out by the evidence in this case, Even so, the
BOB is not legally obligated to provide more services where, as here, the services it does provide
are reasonably calculated to produce educational progress — even if more services would produce
more progress. Extended day services are not necessary for the Student to receive FAPE.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

2.

The Student does not require extended day services in order to receive FAPE.

The BOB was not required to offer extended day services during the relevant time.

 

