March 7, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0256
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Stratford Board ofEdueation

Appearing on behalt‘of the Parents: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf‘ot‘the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berehem, Moses & Devlin, ?.C.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

 

1. Whether the Board violated the Parents’ right to an independent educational evaluation 01‘ the Student by
imposing 113E criteria that violates the IDEA;

2. Whether the Board denied the Parents’ request for an independent evaluation by Dr. Michael Powers
without proper basis;

3. Whether the Board failed to initiate due process hearings when IEEs were denied as required by law;

41 Whether the Board failed to include all ofthe Parents’ requests and the Board’s refusals 0n the Prior
Written Notice pages of 1131’s;

5. Whether the Board excluded necessary related service providers from 1131) meetings rather than
considering the necessity ol‘their involvement on an individual basis, and with consent ol‘the Parents, in
violation of the “excusal” provisions for lEP team members under the IDEA;

6. Whether the Board shall provide the Student an IEE by Dr. Powers at public expense;

7. Whether the Board shall be ordered to create a new IFE policy to conform with their IDEA obligations;

8, Whether the Board shall terminate any policy or practice to exclude entire disciplines ot'service
providers from all but annual review IEP meetings;

9. Whether the Student is entitled to conmensatory education.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

The request for hearing was received by the Board on January 20, 2012 and a prehearing conference convened
on January 30, 2012. At the preheating conference, the parties reported that they agreed to mediate the case.

On March 6, 2012, prior to the ﬁrst hearing date, the Parents’ attorney submitted notiﬁcation that the case was
settled. Therefore, this matter is dismissed.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

 

