July 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0503

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Simsbury Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro-se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Julie C . Fay
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103—1919

Appearing Before: Attorney Robert L. Skeliey
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

Procedural Histogy:

This matter is before the Hearing Ofﬁcer pursuant to a request for a Due Process Hearing ﬁled by the
Parent on June 18, 2012. The Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss/Sufﬁciency Challenge on June 27, 2012,
citing that the matter should be dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction as there was no issue in
dispute over which the hearing ofﬁcer had the authority to resolve; or in the alternative, to direct the
Parent to revise her complaint to comply with the sufﬁciency requirements set forth in 20 U.S.C. §1415
(c)(2)(A). Speciﬁcally the Board requested the identiﬁcation, with speciﬁcity, of the precise issue
which is in dispute between the Board and the Parent, and the speciﬁc remedy the Parent is seeking from
the Board. The Parent responded, Via an email, with what is presumed to be the objections to the
Motion to Dismiss/Sufﬁciency Challenge. A pre-hearing conference was held on J uly 2, 2012. At the
pre-hearing conference the Parent agreed to amend the complaint and to provide the Board and the
Hearing Ofﬁcer with the amended complaint by close of business, July 18, 2012. As of yet, no
Amended Complaint has been received by the Hearing Ofﬁcer. On July 24, 2012, the Board renewed its
request for dismissal of the matter. On July 24, 2012, at approximately 9:29 pm, the Parent sent an
email to the palties in which she states, among other things, “That is correct, I am no longer pursuing
this complaint in a formal hearing”. The email then continues to address the Parent’s difﬁculty in
obtaining information she believed was necessary to address the Amended Complaint; the email
addresses ﬁuther issues and concludes with the Parent stating, “I don’t believe a formal hearing will
correct matters, but I believe I have gotten your attention”. The Board, in the letter renewal for
dismissal does state that the parties are participating in mediation to address issues for the 2012-2013
academic year, and that the mediation is scheduled for August 22, 2012.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

Given that the Parent has stated in writing, via email, that she does not wish to pursue this matter
through a formal hearing; and given that there was not an Amended Complaint ﬁled in this matter
pursuant to the pre-hearing conference agreement of the parties, and with no issues remaining to be
decided, this matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

