July 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0501

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Middletown Board of Education

I

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
30 Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for ESY 2012 and the 2012-13
school year is appropriate;

2. If not, whether the Student shall be provided services through the Ryan Woods Autism
Foundation for the summer 2012 and the 2012-13 school year as requested by the Parent.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board received this request for hearing on June 6, 2012 ﬁled by Brenda Wilson, founder and
executive director of the Ryan Woods Autism Foundation (RWAF) on behalf of the Parent and
the Student. [H.O.-1] Since this was ﬁled by an advocate, and not an attorney or a pro se patty,
the Board did not forward the request to the state Department of Education) immediately as it was
unclear whether the Parent was ﬁling a request for hearing. This matter was not assigned to the
undersigned hearing ofﬁcer until June 19, 2012.

A preheating teleconference convened on June 25, 2012. The Parent; the Parent’s advocate, Ms.
Wilson and the Board’s attorney participated in the prehearing conference. At the preheating
conference, the Parent, her advocate and the Board’s attorney all agreed that the hearing would
convene on July 12 and 16, 2012. The advocate indicated that she would submit a signed
authorization that she would receive the notiﬁcations about the case on behalf Of the Parent, as

the Parent did not have email access.

At the preheating conference, the patties 1'ep01ted that they did not agree to mediate this matter,
and the Board’s attorney was directed to email the hearing ofﬁcer regarding when the resolution

' The Parent was advised by Brenda Wilson, her advocate, until the advocate abruptly terminated her advismy
capacity as is discussed in the procedural history.

July 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0501

session was scheduled. At the ﬁrst hearing date, the Board’s attorney repoﬂed that the Parent
had been uncooperative in convening a resolution meeting. Therefore, a resolution meeting was
not convened.

On the same date as the prehearing conference and after the conference concluded, the Parent’s
advocate initially submitted an unsigned letter from the Parent with a notiﬁcation regarding her
advocate. When notiﬁed that an unsigned letter was submitted, the advocate resubmitted the
letter, this time signed by the Parent. The letter notes that that Parent gives Ms. Wilson the
authorization to act on her behalf, and notes that by “copy of this letter with my afﬁxed
signature, I am requesting that Brenda Wilson, my advocate, receive all correspondence
pertaining to my case (i.e., emails, postal mail, etc.). She will see that I am given copies of all
correspondence and made aware of all timelines and communicate for me and my son . . . from
now to Resolution (sic).” [Exhibit H.O.—2] In this correspondence, it also references the dates of
hearing in the third paragraph, noting that they had “requested there be no Mediation Process;
however, we would like move straight to Resolution. The dates we all agreed upon July 12 or
July 16, 2012 at a time deemed appropriate to all.” By this submission, it appears that the
advocate is using the term resolution interchangeably with the term hearing. The hearing notice
for the hearing dates of July 12 and July 16, 2012 was sent to the advocate in accordance with
the Parent’s instruction, as well as to the Board’s attorney.

On July 4, 2012 the advocate submitted a notice that she “will not continue to advocate” for the
Parent, noting that the Parent “can choose to proceed on her own or ﬁnd an attorney. I highly
encourage the latter.” The reason offered in the July 41" email was that the advocate believed
that an email sent by the Board, which indicates that the Board would not agree to fund the
program for the Student at RWAF, was sent to “motivate me to give up because the decision has
already been made before we (the Parent and the advocate) can even be heard before the Board.”

The hearing was scheduled to convene for the ﬁrst hearing date on July 12, 2012 as set fonh in
the notice sent to the advocate per the instmctions of the Parent and the Board’s attorney. At the
hearing, the Parent did not appear. The Parent was contacted by the Board, and a teleconference
was convened with both parties and the hearing ofﬁcer. The Parent did not indicate that she
wanted to withdraw her claim, but did not want to appear for the hearing as she said she wanted
to work it out with the advocate, although it wasn’t clear whether she wanted to work out
payment for the sewices at RWAF or whether she wanted fuither advice from the advocate who
had terminated her advocacy.

The Board sought a dismissal with prejudice at the hearing, but that was not granted. Instead the
Board was provided time to go forward with their case in a biﬁJrcated manner to provide

testimony regarding the appropriateness of the Student’s program. See, Regs. Conn. Agencies
§10—76h—14.

The Board’s witness was Mindy Otis, Board supervisor of special education.

The Board submitted exhibits number B-l through B—8, which were entered as full exhibits.

 

July 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0501

All exhibits and the testimony of the witness, as well as all email submissions which are part of
the administrative record, were thoroughly reviewed and given their due consideration in this
decision.

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Conni Gen. Stat. §10-76h and
related regulations, 20 U.S.C. §1415(f) and related regulations, and in accordance with the
Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 4—176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4-
181a and 4-186.

DISCUSSION:

This action was ﬁled in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Improvement Act [IDEA] which provides for special education and related services to children
with disabilities, from birth through age 21. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive
a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) with special education and related services
under the disability categoxy of multiple disabilities pursuant to state and federal laws. See Conn.
Gen_ Stat. §§ 10-76 et. seq.; the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act
(IDEA), 20 U.S.C. § 1401, et seq,

After careful review of the emails, exhibits and consideration of the testimony and
statements made by the parties and the advocate, it is cannot be concluded that the Parent was
aware that she was requesting a hearing in this matter and it cannot be concluded that the
advocate appropriately kept her apprised of this matter. It is concluded that the advocate appears
unaware of the healing process, interchangeably using the word resolution and hearing, terms
which denote distinctly different meanings. The advocate then precipitously abandoned her
advocacy of the Parent approximately a week before the hearing. It is rudimentary that a person

who purports to be an advocate must understand the hearing procedure, the law and the short and

long-term impact of their advice on the students and families. That was lacking in this case.

 

July 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0501

It is troubling that the advocate is the executive director of the program which the Parent
is seeking. Her advocacy of the Parent appears to be overreaching and a conﬂict of interest. The
abandomnent of the Parent one week before hearing because the advocate could not secure an
agreement with the Board for placement at the advocate’s summer and after school program and
the apparent failure to appropriately apprise the Parent of the pending hearing was
unprofessional.

At the hearing the Board did provide compelling and persuasive evidence that the
Student’s program as proposed by the Board is appropriate. On March 29, 2012, the Planning
and Placement Team (PPT) met to develop an Individualized Education Program (IEP) for the
Student for ESY 2012 and the 2012—13 school yeah [Testimony Dr. Otis, Exhibit B—4] The
PPT was quite familiar with the Student as they had worked with the Student in an intense way
over the school year. The ESY program was planned at this PPT, based on the Student’s
extensive needs, which the Board recognized. The Student has autism/PDD, as well as
additional learning issues. Based on his needs and the data collected about the Student, the PPT
found that he was eligible for ESY services, which were set fotth in the IEP. [Testimony Dr.
Otis; Exhibits B-4, B-5]

The PPT convened again at the request of the Parent on May 29, 2012 to discuss the
Parent’s request for ESY and extended school day at RWAF. [Testimony Dr. Otis, Exhibit B-6]
The Parent was present with her advocate at this PPT. The Parent was requesting sewices at
RWAF because DCF has terminated funding for the services. The Parent and her advocate did
not articulate that these services were necessary for the Student to receive FAPE. [Testimony Dr.
Otis, Exhibit B-6] The RWAF program was started a few years ago by Brenda Wilson. Its

mission is to provide recreational activities for people age 13 and up with autism spectrum

 

July 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0501

disorder. The program has no certiﬁed staff and is not an academic program. [Testimony Dr.
Otis]

At the May PPT meeting the Board staff reviewed the Student’s progress with the Board
program. The Parent agreed that the Student was making excellent progress. [Testimony Dr.
Otis, Exhibit B—6] The Student had received ESY programming in previous years at the Board
program and his progress reports were reviewed at the PPT. [Testimony Dr. Otis, Exhibit B-3]
The Student’s record reﬂects that he had excellent grades and made honor roll. [Testimony Dr.
Otis, Exhibit B—7] At this PPT, the Board did consider the Parent’s request for services at
RWAF and found these sewices were not necessaiy for the Student to receive FAPE. The Board
members of the PPT rejected the request for funding of services at RWAF for ESY 2012 and the
2012-13 school year. [Testimony Dr. Otis, Exhibit B—6] The Student is currently attending the
Board’s ESY program that commenced on July 10, 2012. [Testimony Dr. Otis]

The standard for determining whether a FAPE has been provided is set foxth in Board of
Education ol‘lhe Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982). The
two-pronged inquiry set fOIth in m asks ﬁrst whether the procedural requirements of IDEA
have been reasonably met and, second, whether the IEP is “reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational beneﬁts.” I_d. at 206-207

The second prong of Rowley is the determination of whether the Board offered the
Student an appropriate IEP. The proper gauge for determining whether the IEP is substantively
appropriate is the question of “whether the educational program provided for a child is
reasonably calculated to allow the child to receive ‘meaningful’ educational beneﬁts.” Mrs. B. V.
Milford Board ofEducation, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120 (2nd Cir. 1997). Meaningful educational

beneﬁts are “not everything that might be thought desirabie by loving parents.” Tucker V. Bay

 

July 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0501

Shore Union Free School Dist, 873 F.2d 563, 567 (2nd Cir. 1989). Rather, school districts are
required to provide a “‘basic ﬂoor of oppmtunity’ . . . [by providing] access to specialized
services which are individually designed to provide educational beneﬁt to the handicapped
child.” W, m, 458 US. at 201; E alﬂ K.P. V. Juzwic, 891 F. Supp. 703, 718 (D.C0nn.
1995) (the goal of the IDEA is to provide access to public education for disabled students, not to
maximize a disabled child’s potential)

The Board’s proposed IEP for the Student includes appropriate goals and objectives that
address the Student’s demonstrated weaknesses. The proposed program is individualized and
based on the Student’s assessments and performance, and is provided in the least restrictive
environment. The Student has made good progress in the program, including the summer
program.

Because the IEP offers an appropriate program in the LRE, the Parent would not be
entitled to reimbursement for ESY or extended school day services at RWAF.

Nevenheless, it cannot be concluded that the Parent knew and understood that the
advocate ﬁled the request for hearing. The advocate’s communications to the hearing ofﬁcer
were unclear and reﬂect a poor understanding of the hearing process. The Parent did not appear
for the hearing. When she was contacted Via teleconference she was unclear about whether she
knew she had a pending case and said she would bring this up with her advocate. Based on a
careful review of the record, as well as consideration of the representations made to the hearing
ofﬁcer, it is concluded that the Parent does not want to proceed with the hearing and has not
actively prosecuted her claims. Therefore, this matter shall be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

This matter is DISMISSED.

