June 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0417

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the District: Attorney Abby Wadler
Assistant T own Attorney
Town of Greenwich
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES

1. Was the Student’s alleged misconduct a manifestation of his disability?
2. If not, should the Student be disciplined as proposed by the Board of Education
(i.e., in the same manner as if he were not disabled)?

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY

The Student’s Request for an Expedited Impartial Special Education Hearing to challenge
a manifestation determination of May 3, 2012 was received by the Board of Education on
May 22, 2012 (Exhibit Hearing Ofﬁcer 1). This Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case
on May 22, 2012. A preheating conference was conducted on May 31, 2012 at which
time a full evidentiary hearing was scheduled for June 13, 2012, The mailing date for the
ﬁnal decision was established to be July 6, 2012.

Both palties submitted witness lists and proposed exhibits. When the hearing was
convened on June 13, 2012, the Student’s Exhibits P1 through P8 and P10 through P14
were entered as full exhibits and the Board’s Exhibits B1 through B15 were entered as
full exhibits. The Student withdrew proposed Exhibit P9.

The panics each made an oral opening statement. The Student stipulated that he does not
claim that the Student’s IEP was not being implemented at the relevant time. In addition,
the Student conﬁrmed that he does not challenge the process by which the IEP Team
conducted the manifestation determination on May 3, 2012.

The Student presented testimony from Dr. Button R. Rubin as well as each of his parents.
The Board then presented testimony from Special Education Administrator Rosemary
Ampha, School Psychologist Dr. Jeffrey DeToso, House Administrator Richard Alessi,

June 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—041 7

Dean Lorraine Termini, and Teacher Dorothy Sirbano. The palties each waived oral and
written argument.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth my ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law. I
reviewed and considered all of the evidence presented in this matter. Speciﬁc references
to certain evidence here are not meant to exclude other evidence. Moreover, to the extent
that the Summary, Procedural History and Findings of Fact actually represent
Conclusions of Law, they should be considered as such, and vice versa. SAS Institute
Inc. v S & H Computer Systems, Inc. 605 F. Supp. 816, 817 (M.D. Tenn. 1985).

SUMMARY

The Student is a seventeen year old senior at the public high school. He has received
special education services since the foumh grade under the category of Other Health
Impairment because he suffers from attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). On
March 30, 2012, the Student was involved in an automobile accident resulting from his
and his friends’ reckless driving on Interstate 95. As a result of the accident, the State
Police discovered evidence that the Student was also engaged in selling dmgs.

The public high school proposes to expel the Student for possession of drugs with intent
to sell in accordance with state law mandate. A manifestation determination was
conducted on May 3, 2012. The manifestation determination resulted in a conclusion that
the misconduct was not a manifestation of the Student’s disability because possession of
drugs for sale was not an impulsive or spontaneous act. The Student’s parents brought
this appeal, claiming that the misconduct was a manifestation 0fthe disability in that it
involved impulsivity and/or was related to a diminished inner voice or craving for risky
behavior related to the Student’s ADHD.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Student is a seventeen year old senior at Greenwich High School. He has
been identiﬁed as a student in need of special education under the category ot‘Other
Health Impaired since December 2003, when he was in the fourth grade. (Testimony of
Mother and Exhibit B13, p. 2).

2. The Student’s disabling health impairment is Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity
Disorder. (Testimony of Mother) The Student’s disability is exhibited in, among other
things, signiﬁcant attentional and response to inhibition difﬁculties, including
impulsivity, divided attention and a propensity to make careless errors. (Exhibit B13, pp.
16-17).

3. Despite his disability, the Student is enrolled in college preparation courses and is
expected to graduate with his peers and go on to a four year college 01‘ university. (B10).

4, Each of the Student’s three objectives focuses on academic concerns, such as
improving test taking and study skills, fulﬁlling activities for his transition to a four year

June 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0417

college, and choosing an internship. (Exhibit 810). His only special education service is
resource room support for three 58 minute sessions per week. (Exhibit B10).

5. At the last annual review meeting in January 2012, the Student’s IEP Team
determined, among other things, that the Student’s behavior does not impede his or other
students’ learning. As such, the Student does not have a Behavior Intervention Plan and
is subject to the same schoolwide behavior/discipline plan applicable to the general
student population. He receives no services or accommodations for behavioral or
emotional difﬁculties. (Exhibit 10).

6. The Student had no involvement with the criminal justice system until the
incident at issue. (Testimony ofMother). Moreover, he had no signiﬁcant behavior
infractions in high school until his Senior Year. (Testimony of Termini). He earned an
excellent academic record, with mostly A’s and B’s, in his junior year of high school.
(Exhibit B5).

7. The 2011-2012 School Year brought trouble for the Student on multiple fronts.
His grades fell markedly (Exhibits BS and B10), and he was disciplined for skipping
class, leaving class and plagiarism, all before the incident at issue. (Exhibit B4). His
attendance has been marked by frequent unexcused absences, and he has garnered a
reputation for not completing his assignments. (Exhibits B7 and B10; Testimony of
Sirbono).

8. At some point, the Student stopped taking medication prescribed for his ADHD
because of unwanted side effects. (Testimony of Father). On March 15, 2012, his
physician Dr. Rubin prescribed a new ADHD medication for him. (Exhibit P9).

9. Although the Student’s academic progress and his behavior declined signiﬁcantly
this school year, there was no evidence that the nature or severity of his disability
changed since his fourth grade year.

10. On about April 19, 2012, administrators at Greenwich High School learned that
the Student was allegedly involved in a serious incident on March 30, 2012. According
to a report from the Connecticut State Police, the Student engaged in a reckless car race
with another driver on Interstate 95, weaved between cars and ultimately collided with an
innocent motorist. (Exhibit B3).

1 1. When they arrived on the scene of the accident, authorities discovered evidence
that the Student was also engaged in selling drugs. They discovered two baggies of white
powder thought to be Ecstasy, “multiple” small plastic baggies containing marijuana, and
a 100 gram weight probably used for weighing and packaging drugs in the passenger
compartment of the Student’s car. (Exhibit B3, p. 4). A second batch of “severa1”small
plastic baggies containing marijuana and a glass jar containing marijuana buds were
found in the trunk of the car. (Exhibit B3, p. 4).

June 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0417

12. The Student had approximately $1,000.00 in cash on his person, mostly in small
bills. (Exhibit B3, p. 5).

13. Before the authorities arrived at the scene, a passenger from another car retrieved
a small scale and packages of different size plastic baggies from the Student’s car.
(Exhibit B3, p. 4). The Student later conceded that these items belonged to him. (Exhibit
B3, p. 5).

14. In addition, the Student threw a bag ﬁlled with marijuana from his car
immediately after the accident. (Exhibit B3, pp. 5—6).

15. The Student was arrested on six criminal charges associated with the incident:
Reckless Driving, Following too Close, Possession of Drug Paraphernalia in a Drug
Factory, Illegal Sale of a Controlled Substance, Sale of Illegal Drug and Drug
Paraphernalia. (Exhibit B3, p. 6—7).

16. The Student was suspended from Greenwich High School for ten school days for
alleged “drug possession with intent to sell.” (Exhibit B2). In addition, the school
administration proposes to pursue expulsion of the Student for the alleged drug
possession with intent to sell, as required by state law. Connecticut General Statutes
Section 10—233d(a)(2),

17. The Student’s IEP Team, including the Student’s parents, was convened on May
3, 2012 to make a manifestation determination concerning the incident. (Exhibit B1).
The Team derived part of its understanding of the alleged misconduct from a written
repoﬁ of the incident by the State Police. (Testimony of Ampha). That repott does not
specify exactly how many small bags of marijuana were found or indicate when the
Student acquired the marijuana, Ecstasy and the drug paraphernalia. (Exhibit B3). The
IEP Team also heard a report from an administrator that the Student admitted to her that
all of the drugs and dmg paraphernalia belonged to him. (Testimony of Ampha and
Termini).

18. The Student was invited to the manifestation determination meeting but did not
attend. (Exhibit B1).

19. The IEP Team also reviewed and considered information about the Student’s
disability provided by, among others, School Psychologist Dr. DeToso, the Student’s
parents and the Student’s physician, Dr. Button Rubin, in the form of a letter.

(Testimony of Ampha and DeToso). In his letter, Dr. Rubin expressed the opinion that
the Student’s disability and “documented impulse-contro] challenges” played a major role
in the “automobile accident and dmg possession incident.” (Exhibit P8).

20. When Dr. Rubin testiﬁed during the hearing, he explained that his understanding
of the “drug possession incident” was the Student’s decision to be present in a car with

drugs and friends on the day in question. Dr. Rubin conceded that his opinion would not
hold if the Student engaged in “a chain of purposeful behaviors.” (Testimony ofRubin).

June 25, 2012 , Final Decision and Order 12—0417

21. School Psychologist Dr. DeToso, also spoke to the IEP Team and testiﬁed at the
hearing. He indicated that individuals with ADHD, including the Student, have a
propensity to act impulsively and to make quick, careless decisions without regard for the
consequences. Dr. DeToso explained his view that the Student’s misconduct in
possessing dmgs with the intent to sell, however, was not impulsive because it involved
many distinct actions, each of which offered the Student an opportunity to make a
different choice.

22. The IEP Team — excluding the Student’s parents — determined that the Student’s
misconduct in possessing drugs with intent to sell was not a manifestation of the
Student’s disability because the underlying activities of obtaining a bulk quantity of
drugs, weighing and packaging smaller amounts of the drugs in small plastic bags, and
exchanging the small bags for money, likely involved a series of purposeful 01' deliberate
acts, with many opportunities to make choices. As such, the IEP Team decided that the
Student’s misconduct in possessing drugs with the intent to sell could not be
characterized as impulsive or as involving a quick, careless decision without regard for
the consequences. (Exhibit Bl).

23. The Student, like many individuals with ADHD, does have a propensity for
impulsivity. He is more likely than others to act quickly without considering the
consequences of his deed. (Testimony of Mother and DeToso).

24. The Student’s behavior in this case ~ possession of drugs with the intent to sell —
however, was not impulsive and did not involve a careless decision made without regard
for the consequences. Instead, his misconduct involved a series of purposeful acts.

25. The Student points out that there was no evidence before either the IEP Team or
this hearing ofﬁcer that the Student’s misconduct took place over a long period of time.
He argues that in the absence of evidence that the misconduct took place over an
extended period of time, the Student’s behavior could be characterized as “impulsive” or
“quick.”

26. While it is true that there was no speciﬁc evidence of the duration of the
misconduct, it is reasonable to infer that the Student’s activities took place over at least
several hours, if not days. The presence of the scale, the jar with buds and at least two
separate batches of “several” small baggies containing marijuana, as well as the large
amount of cash in mostly small bills strongly suggest that the Student packaged and sold
many small bags of marijuana. With each measurement, each package, and each sale, the
Student made a decision to engage in misconduct. Even if the misconduct took place on
a single day, it was neither impulsive nor an action quickly taken without regard for the
consequences.

27. The Student also argued that individuals with ADHD tend to have a diminished
“internal voice” to guide them away from misconduct, and that they crave the stimulation
and thrill of risky behavior. Although the Student presented published articles that might

June 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0417

support this theory (Exhibits P2 through P7), the evidence did not demonstrate that the
Student ﬁts such a proﬁle.

28. There was no evidence — outside of the incident at issue - to suggest that the
Student has a histoty of misconduct involving a series of deliberate or purposeful actions.
To the contrary, the misconduct referenced in the case, including the incident described
by his mother — throwing glass on the playground — could well have involved sudden,
impulsive acts. Signiﬁcantly, the Student had no signiﬁcant misconduct during his ﬁrst
three years of high school. (Testimony of Termini). He has a reputation for being a good
worker and dedicated volunteer in the community. (Exhibits P10 through P14). Even his
senior year misbehaviors could have been impulsive: cutting class, 1eaving class and
plagiarism. Although he has been diagnosed with ADHD since 2003, there was no
evidence ofa history of deliberate, thrilling 01‘1'isky behaviors other than the incident at
issue. (E Exhibit B13).

29. Moreover, neither of the two very credible professionals who actually testiﬁed at
the hearing - Dr. Rubin and Dr. DeToso — suppOIted the theory that ADHD predisposes
one to misconduct involving deliberate choices.

30. Finally, there was insufﬁcient evidence to ﬁnd a nexus to the Student’s ADHD
medication. Dr. Rubin’s letter to the IEP Team stated that he prescribed a new ADHD
medication for the Student on March 15, 2012, about two weeks before the incident.
(Board Exhibit 8). The Student’s father, by contrast, stated that the Student was not
taking ADHD medication at the time of the incident, but is taking it now. Neither Dr.
Rubin nor any other witness gave the opinion that the presence or absence of medication
played a role in the Student’s misconduct.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. In order for a local board of education to expel a student with a disability for a
violation of the code of student conduct, the school, the student’s parents and relevant
members of the student’s IEP team must review pertinent information and determine that:
(1) the student’s misconduct was not caused by, and did not have a direct and substantial
relationship to, the student’s disability, and (2) that the misconduct was not the direct
result of the school’s failure to implement the student’s IEP. 20 U.S.C. Section
1415(k)(1)(E).

2. In this case, the Student does not claim that the misconduct was a direct result of
the school’s failure to implement the IEP, leaving only the first inquiry for consideration:
whether the misconduct was caused by or had a direct and substantial relationship to, the
disability.

3. A Student who disagrees with a manifestation determination may challenge the
decision through an expedited impaitiai due process hearing. 20 U.S.C. Sections
1415(k)(3)(A) and 1415(k)(4)(B); 34 CFR 300.532; Regulations of Comiecticut State
Agencies, Section 10-76h-10.

June 25, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0417

4. The patty who initiates an impaltial special education due process hearing to
challenge a manifestation determination has the burden to prove that the misconduct was
a manifestation of the disability. Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Section 10-
76h-14.

5. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals discussed the meaning of “conduct that is a
manifestation of the child’s handicap” in Doe v. Maher, 793 F.2d 1470, 1480, fn. 8 (9"'
Cir 1986) affd. sub nam. Honig v. Doe, 484 US. 305 (1988). As the court explained:

The district coult usually used the term “conduct that is a manifestation of
the child’s handicap” to describe the kind of student misconduct that has a
“protected” status. . . . As we use them, these phrases are terms intended to
mean the same thing. They refer to conduct that is caused by, or has a
direct and substantial relationship to, the child’s handicap. Put another
way, a handicapped child’s conduct is covered by this deﬁnition only if
the handicap signiﬁcantly impairs the child’s behavioral controls. . . . [I]t
does not embrace conduct that bears only an attenuated relationship to the
child’s handicap.

6. The evidence presented did not establish that the Student’s misconduct was
impulsive or the product of a quickly made decision. Instead, the Student’s alleged
misconduct in packaging and selling dulgs involved a series of discrete decisions and
purposeful acts that took place over the course of hours or days. E Farrin v. Maine
School Administrative District No. 59, 165 F. Supp. 2d 37 (D. Me 2001) (Student did not
demonstrate that “impulsivity” problem manifested itself in a decision to sell marijuana);
Student and Greenwich Board of Education, Final Decision and Order in Case No. 10-
0273 (Patricia M. Strong, Hearing Officer, March 4, 2012)(Greenwich High School
Student’s ADHD was not manifested in his possession of marijuana with intent to sell);
and Center Uniﬁed School District, 1 12 LRP 12038 (SEA CA 2012)(Student’s decision
to smoke marijuana at school was not spontaneous when planned over many hours).

7. Accordingly, the Student failed to carry his burden to prove that his misconduct
was a manifestation of his disability.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER 1

The Student’s conduct on or about March 30, 2012 in possessing dmgs with the intent to
sell was not a manifestation of his disability. Accordingly, the Student may be
disciplined in the same manner as if he were not disabled, as proposed by the Board of
Education.

 

