August 20, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0477

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Winchester Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Mark Sommaruga
Sullivan, Schoen, Campane & Schoen, LLC

24 Stony Hill Road, Suite 106
Bethel, CT 06081

Appearing before: Attorney Roben L. Skelley, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Is High Road Academy the appropriate placement for the student?

2. Does the current program offered in the May 24, 2012 Individualized Education Program (“IEP”) offer the
Student a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”)?

3. 1f the answer to either question No, 1 or No. 2 is no, what is the proper program and placement for the
Student?

4. Does the Student require the previous additional services offered prior to the May 24, 2012 IEP, which
occurred during the holiday/vacation time of the academic year, and the extended school year?

SUMMARY:

The due process hearing was requested by the Parent and received by the Board on June 11, 20121 The Parent
requested that one hearing ofﬁcer hear this case and a sibling case rather than two separate hearing ofﬁcers.
After consultation with the Hearing Ofﬁcer involved in the sibling matter, the request to have one hearing
ofﬁcer hear both matters was granted. On June 22, 2012 the Hearing Ofﬁcer involved in the sibling matter
recused herself ﬁ'om the case and this hearing ofﬁcer took jurisdiction of both matters. A pre-hearing
conference was held on July, 2, 2012, where the parties identiﬁed the above issues as the issues for hearing.
The patties stated that they wanted to utilize mediation to attempt to resolve the matter. The Parent, with the
consent of the Board, requested an extension of the resolution period in order to allow for mediation to occur.
The request was granted. An initial hearing date was set for August 15, 2012. On August 15, 2012, a Due
Process Hearing convened at the Winchester Board of Education. The Parent was present, with the Board
attorney present telephonically (with permission from the Hearing Ofﬁcer). At the start of the hearing, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer entered the Notice of Complaint and the appointment of the Hearing Ofﬁcer as Exhibits 1 and 2
respectively. The Parent then stated on the record that she wished to withdraw the request for a due process
hearing as the patties had just reached agreement; the Board attorney agreed that an agreement had been

reached. At this point, the due process hearing ended.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

This matter is DISMISSED without prejudice.

 

