March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120004

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Easton Board of Education

Appearing on Behalf of the Parents: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Klebanoff & Alfano, P.C.

433 South Main Street, Suite 102
West Hartford, CT 06110

Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Marsha B. Moses, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.C.

75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460 ‘

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado, Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUES:

1. Was the program offered by the Board for the 20102011 school year appropriate
and did it provide the Student with a free and appropriate education (FAPE) in the
least restrictive environment (LRE)? If not;

. Does the Program at Villa Maria provide the Student with FAPB in the LRE?

3. Should the Board reimburse the Parents for their unilateral placement of the
Student at Villa Maria for the 2010-201 1 school year?

4. Should the Board reimburse the Parents for the Student’s private speech and
language, occupational therapy and physical therapy services during the 2010-
2011 school year?

5. Should the Board reimburse the Parents for the cost of the extended school year

program for the summer of 2010? :1.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

SUMMARY:

The Student has been as identiﬁed with Multiple Disabilities and is entitled to receive a
free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) as deﬁned in the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.Ci §1401 et seq, and
Connecticut General Statute §10-76a, et seq. At a PPT meeting, the Parents rejected the
program offered by the Board for the 2010—201 1 schoo1 year. The Parents requested
placement at Villa Maria for the 2010—201 1 school year at the Board’s expense. The

Board refused the Parents” request

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0004

VPROCEDURAL HISTORY.-

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(CGS) §10~76h and related regulations, 20 United States C0de§1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, CGS
§§4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, and 4-181a and 4-186.

On or about Ju1y 1, 2011, the Board received notice ofthe Parents’ request for due
process. The parties agreed to go to mediation in p1ace of a resolution meeting,

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on July 13, 201 1 and a pre-hearing
conference was held on July 20, 201 1. Hearing dates of September 15, 20, 19, October
25, November 15, 17, 18, December 2, 5, 6, 9, and 12, 2011 were chosen by the parties.
The November 15, 17 and 18, 2011 hearing dates were cancelled. The Board submitted
Board Exhibits 1through 51, 54 through 59 and 61 through 65. The Parents submitted
Parent Exhibits 1 through 17 and 20 through 25; Parent Exhibit 18 was only received for

identiﬁcation.

The Parents’ attorney ﬁled a Motion for Telephonic Testimony but the motion was
withdrawn by the Parents’ attorney.

The date for the mailing of the F inal Decision and Order was extended to accommodate
the panies’ mediation , hearing dates and Post Trial Briefs. The date for mailing the Final
Decision and Order is March 15, 2012.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact
and conclusions oflaw. The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions oflaw set forth herein,
which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other
supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this
matter. To the extent that the summary, procedural histmy and ﬁndings of fact actually
represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered and vice versa. SAS Institute
Inc. v. S, & H, Computer Systems, Inc., 605 FSupp. 816 (MDTenn. 1985) and Bonnie
Ann F.V. Callallen Independent School Board 835 F,Supp, 340 (S.D.Tex, 1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is diagnosed with Multiple Disabilities. She has been found eligible to
receive special education and related services under IDEA. The Student has global
developmental apraxia, attention deﬁcit disorder, leaming disabilities, sensory
integration issues and anxiety. (Testimony of Parent, Board’s Exhibitl No. 14)

2. In 2008, the Student received a neuropsychblegical evaluation. The evaluator
recommended additional hours in a regular education setting. The Parents were in
disagreement with this recommendation because they were of the opinion that this
would increase the Student’s ﬁustration. (Testimony of F ather)

' Hereaﬁer Parent’s Exhibits wil1he noted as “P" followed by the exhibit number and Board Exhibits will

be noted with a “B” followed by the exhibit number.

2

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120004

3. The Student had difﬁculties with transitions and presents with extremely slow
processing speed and deﬁcits in working memory. The Student exhibits a pattern of
learning disability which impacts her progress in reading, spelling and number
sense, which reﬂects a complicated interaction of her deﬁcits in phonological
development, motor planning, and visual perception and scanning. She works better
with cues. (Testimony of Father, Board Speech and Language Pathologist [BSLPD

4. On or about May 2008, a neuropsychological. evaluation was administered to the
Student. The evaluation and evaluator were mutually agreed upon by the parties.
The evaluator made various recommendations with which the Parent was in
agreement. The evaluator recommended:
a. Ongoing speech and language, occupational, and physical therapy services
with individual and a Classroom consultation component;
b. Training meetings to review the Student’s progTess and classroom
materials modiﬁcations;
0. An assistive technology evaluation;
A stmctured, multi-sensory, sequential approach to reading that
emphasizes phonemic awareness and the development of alphabet
principles;
The Student is a candidate for a slant board;
Modiﬁed worksheet;
Additional time to formulate her responses and to express herself;
Breaks in teaching and time to regroup;
Extracurricular activity as the student is at risk for poor self—esteem and

frustration;
The student should be involved in a school based social skills group.

(Testimony of Parent, B—16)

.0-

*‘P‘QQWO

5. On or about March 17 through April 3, 2008, a Comprehensive Academic
Achievement Evaluation was conducted of the Student. The Student was found to
have deﬁcits in Phonological Processing. The evaluator recommended small group
instruction that focused on these deﬁcits and incorporation of such instruction in her
systematic explicit phonics instruction. The evaluator recommended a multisensory
approach and frequent practice/drill to build ﬂuency with the academic skills she

currently had in place. (B-IZ)

6. On or about June, 2008, the Board had an assistive technology assessment
conducted The evaluator recommended a slant board and found that the Student
could beneﬁt from computer use with a possible color coded keyboard. The
Student’s skills improved with the use of the slant board and a better organized
work space (Testimony of Board’s Occupational Therapist [BOT], B-18)

7. At the June 11, 2008 PPT (planning and placement team) meeting, the team
reviewed the evaluations of the Student that were conducted by the Board. The
assistive technology therapist (ATT) recommended a consultative model of

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0004

10.

ll.

12‘

services. The IBP does not reﬂect any AT consultative services, The PPT wanted
additional information regarding the Student’s current motor skills speech
(Testimony of ATT. Parent and B-l9)

On or about September 22, 2008 the neuropsychologist, who had evaluated the
Student, observed the Student in her 15' grade classroom. The evaluator was
impressed with the Student‘s participation and motivation in the classroom setting.
He recommended signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the classroom setting. The Student
demonstrated the language and cognitive skills necessary to comprehend the
content presented in the classroom but her capability was limited because of her
visual, motor processing speed and working memory limitations in traditional
classroom activities and homework assignments, Any task requiring writing would
be a challenge to the Student. The evaluator recommended allowing the Student to
verbalize her responses and allow a scribe to write her responses The evaluator
recommended consistency across all domains and providers and stepwise sequential
learning with regular team meetings, signiﬁcant pre—planning and modiﬁcations of

materials. (B—23)

In September 2008, the Parents’ private occupational therapist evaluated the
Student and recommended the need for the Student to have consistency across all
areas of her school day. Consistency will help her gain independence. The Student
had push in and pull out services for occupational therapy. The therapist worked on
developing handwriting skills, sensory processing and addressed self help issues.

(324)

On or about October 10, 2008, a PPT meeting was held to review the evaluations
that were conducted and review a revised IEP. The Parents were concemed that the
Student’s use of syntax posed a signiﬁcant interference in her communication skills
and should be targeted. The team was of the opinion that the Student required work
on literacy skills before syntax and grammar. The Parents were not in agreement
with the revised IEP and it was recommended that the Student’s speech and
language functioning be reevaluated in the areas of syntax and grammar‘ The
Parents were looking for more direct services. (B—25, Testimony of CREC

Consultant)

The Student was receiving additional speec‘h‘an‘d language and occupational therapy
services from private providers. These services were being provided before the
beginning of the school day. These early services impacted the Student’s school day
in that she arrived late for morning activities; the early services also fatigued the
Student. (Testimony of CREC Consultant)

The PPT team met again to discuss implementation of the IEP offered at the
October 10, 2008 PPTT The Parents submitted a two page letter outlining their
disagreement with the proposed IEP. Among the concerns raised by the Parents was
the lack of any behavioral intervention plan (BIP) for the Student. The Parents
requested that a functional behavioral assessment (FBA) be conducted. The Parents

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0004

 

13‘

14.

15.

16.

17.

were also in disagreement with many ofthe goals and objectives being offered and
were concerned that the speech and language services were being reduced (B-BI)

In February 2009, a functional behavioral assessment was done of the Student. The
Parents had input into the plan. The behaviors noted by the evaluator were
aggression, screaming and throwing or ripping objects. F atigue appeared to impact
the Student’s success. A plan was developed to address these behaviors. The
behaviors demonstrated were not a factor in the Student making progress in her
program, (B33, Testimony of CREC Consultant)

On February 19, 2009, the PPT met to review the functional behavioral assessment
administered by the board certiﬁed behavioral analyst (BCBA) The PPT added two
goals to the Student’s IEP to address her social and behavioral issues. The BCBA
was of the opinion that the Student’s BIP can be appropriately delivered in the
Board’s school with a collaborative team model. The CREC Consultant noted that
the Student was making progress based on the data that was available. The Parents
continued to express that the Student’s IEP could not meet her academic, social and
behavioral needs The Parents were not opposed to the program being at the
Board’s school but it needed to provide FAPE to the Student. The Student attended
Brownie meetings at the Board’s school approximately 2 times a week. (P-24,

Testimony of F ather)

In March 2009, the Parents unilaterally placed the Student at Villa Maria School
because of their concern that the Student’s IEP was inadequate. They chose Villa
Maria because it was a small environment with a low student to teacher ratio and
there would not be pull—out services. The Parents are satisﬁed with their decision
because the Student’s negative behavior and level of stress had been reduced
Through the mediation process the Board and the Parents entered into a conﬁdential
agreement and the Student remained at Villa Maria for the 2009-2010 school year.

(Testimony of Father)

At the commencement of the Student attendance at Villa Maria, the administrator of
Villa Maria (AVM) observed the Student’s behavioral issues and limited to 10
minutes of work at the beginning of the school day The Student’s handwriting was
mostly lines‘ The AVM noted that the Student had verbal aphaxia problems with
ﬁne and gross motor skills, muscle tone issues and gastrointestinal problems.

(Testimony of AVM)

The Student’s private occupational therapist has worked with the Student since
2008. The Student is seen 3 times a week for a one hour session During the 2008-
2009 school year she was contacted by the Board’s special education teacher and
occupational therapist. They were seeking feedback to help the Student. The
Student showed low self esteem during the 2008—2009 school year During her
2009-2010 school year she talked about her school year and seemed happier,
(Testimony of Private Occupational Therapist)

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0004

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

During the last quarter of the 2008—2009 school year at Villa Maria, the Student
made progress in developing age appropriate skills. The Student became a more
independent learner and sought help when it was needed. The Student required
breaks during the school day. (P—2)

The Student’s mid-term report at Villa Maria showed that the student made a good
transition to the 1St grade. The Student made slow but steady progress and was able
to decode simple CVC words. The Student’s strength was in comprehension but it
would take several attempts to read words correctly. The Student used modiﬁed
paper, slant board and special pencil grips to assist with handwriting. In math the
Student needed a great amount of teacher assistance. The Student needed to slow
down and improve her basic number sense in order to progress to more diﬂicult
levels of math. She is able to solve basic addition and subtraction with the use of

manipulatives. (P-4)

The Student’s 2009-2010 Villa Maria IEP eontained two social and behavioral
goals which addressed the Student’s social interactions with peers, behaviors in the
school environment and coping solutions in conﬂict situations. The Student was
making satisfactory progress with these goals. The Student made satisfactory
progress in all her goals in her Villa Maria IEP but mastered none. Of the 32
objectives in her IEP she mastered 5, made satisfactory progress in 24 and limited
progress in 3. She made limited progress in gross/ﬁne motor objectives. (P-9)

During the 2009~2010 school year, the Student received speech and language
services at home twice a week for 45 minutes each session. The Student continues
to struggle with motor planning and coordination of her aniculators to produce
intelligible speech. The Student demonstrated progress with articulation oferror
sounds at the word and sentence levels and she continues to exhibit intelligibility in
conversation. An informal language sample revealed that the Student also exhibits
expressive language errors with syntax and grammar. (P-7, Testimony of Private
Speech and Language Therapist)

During the second semester of the Student’s 2009-2010 school year, she
occasionally received one to one instruction by a tutor to support her classroom
instruction. This aided the Student in making. excellent progress in reading and
decoding. The Student made progress in he'r‘ Vlanguage class, Her handwriting has
shown some improvement, however she tires easily after writing more than a few
sentences. It was recommended that the Student use an Alpha Smart or lap top to
make writing less stressful. In math the Student received one to one tutoring
through the second semester for approximately half of her math class. The Student
was focusing on writing numbers to thiity. Speech and language goals are not
included in the Student’s IEP; services are provided by a speech and language
pathologist and a report is written by the pathologist and shared with the Parents.
Occupational therapy can be provided at Villa Maria but the student does not
receive it there; the Parents provide private occupational therapy services. (P-IO,
Testimony of AVM)

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order l2-0004

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

In planning for the 2010—2011 school year, the Board requested permission to
conduct evaluations. The Board presented to the Parents and Villa Maria the
evaluators that would conduct the evaluations. Villa Maria objected to the number
of people doing the obsewationst Only the special education teacher, speech and
language pathologist and the occupational therapist evaluated and observed the
Student The Parents agreed to the evaluations and observations the Board
requested. (B—39 pg 4, Testimony of CREC Consultant)

The Board’s speech and language pathologist (BSLP) observed the Student at Villa
Maria, The Student did not show any signs of stress or anxiety during the
observation; the observer did not see the Student as a self advocate. The Student
was observed during a snack time and was concentrating on eating; she did not
initiate interaction with her peers. The Student was able to count by 5’s verbally,
but appeared to have difﬁculty in visually scanning the numbers and identifying
them When the teacher moved to work with another student, the Studentjust sat
there rather than try to work independently. (Testimony of BSLP, B—4l)

The BSLP performed a Comprehensive Assessment of Spoken Language (CASL).
The test demonstrated that the Student’s language skills were below age level
expectations. The Student was also given a Comprehensive Test of Phonological
Processing (CTOPP). This test had been previously given to the Student in 2008. A
comparison of the two tests showed an increase in accuracy of blending words, but
the overall composite scores remained similar, indicating that phonological
awareness skills were still an area of difﬁculty for the Student. The Student’s score
in the Phonological Memory composite was compared with the previous composite
score, which indicated little evidence of progress. The Rapid Name composite score
indicated growth from the last report. This indicated that the Student’s ability to
retrieve information has improved from the last assessment. Student’s scores in the
speech and language evaluation are in line with what was seen by the Private
Speech and Language Pathologist. (B-4l, Testimony of Private Speech and

Language Therapist)

In May 2010 an occupational therapy evaluation was done by the Board’s
occupational therapist. The evaluator noted that the Student had difﬁculty in
processing sensory information, panicularly with visual, movement and touch
input. These difﬁculties impact the Student’s ability to produce written work. The
Student’s visual motor and Visual perception skills are below age level. The Parents
were concerned about how the evaluator was able to complete all the testing in one

hour. (B—42, Testimony of Father)

The BOT observed the Student for one hour at Villa Maria. The observer noted that
the Student’s written product and the lettersw‘ere not connected; during snack, the
Student had difﬁculty opening the container. The Student demonstrated fatigue and
rested her head on her hands. For sensory integration the only strategy observed
was the wedge cushion. It was reported that breaks were also offered as additional

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120004

28.

29.

30.

31.

sensory strategy but was not offered during the observation. The evaluator wanted
to perform the Bruininks-Osertsky Test of Motor Proﬁciency but the Parents
wanted their evaluator to perform this test. (Testimony of BOT)

In June 2010, the Parents had the private occupational therapist conduct the
Bruininks-Osertsky Test of Motor Proﬁciency of the Student The evaluator found
that the Student demonstrated signiﬁcant delays in her ﬁne motor skill development
across a variety of areas but most notably in her Response Speed. The subtest looks
at a child’s ability to respond to an immediate visual by stopping it with their hand.
The Student was unable to react in time to the visual and scored a zero on this
subset. In the other 2 subtests of this test the Student performed better but still
demonstrated signiﬁcant delays. The evaluator compared the Student’s prior test
score, but the comparison was not reliable as the year of the prior test was incorrect
and it was unclear what time span the imprbvements reﬂected. (P-S)

The Board’s special education teacher performed an observation of the Student in
preparation for her return to the Board’s school. The Student was using a 15‘ grade
level book and required prompting for all observed activities. The Student was able
to remain focused during the lesson. She demonstrated skills in comprehension but
struggled with deciphering. The Student had prior behavior problems but during the
observation, her behavior was not an issue The evaluator only utilized one
instrument for testing because the Student had been widely tested and wanted to use
the allotted time to test the Student wisely, The special education teacher felt that
the Student would be successful in the Board’s school because of the program the
Board had prepared for the Student. The class size would be small and the Student
would beneﬁt from being with non~disabled peers. (Testimony of Special Education

Teacher)

The special education teacher conducted the Weschler Individual Achievement
Test-3rd Edition (WIAT III) for the purpose ofplanning and developing an IEP for
the 2010-2011 school yeart The Student demonstrated strength in the area of oral
language. The test indicated that the Student’s achievement in the areas of writing,
reading and mathematics were below whathould be expected of her child her age.
The Student had been held back in grade one and her scores appeared below what
would be expected from a student ﬁnishing her lSt grade. The Parents did not
disagree with this evaluation. (B-43, Testimony of F ather)

The Board conducted a physical therapy evaluation of the Student in preparation for
her return to the Board’s school for the 2010~2011 school year. The evaluation
showed that the Student’s gross motor ability fell into the low range. She
demonstrated more conﬁdence which allowed her to want to repeat and practice a
skill in order to better perform it. The Student moved around the room with control
and maintained a positive attitude throughout the evaluation The Parents did not
disagree with the evaluation. (P-48, Testimony of Father)

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0004

32. The Parents sought an independent neuropsychological evaluation of the Student in

33.

34.

35,

36.

order to ascenain her progress, document a_ny continued cognitive/leaming
difﬁculties, and determine appropriate interventions to target her needs. The
observations at Villa Maria and the testing occurred on November 18, 2010,
December 2, 2010, February 24, 201 1 and March 7, 201 1. The evaluator who
performed the observations determined that based upon these observations, some
updated testing was required to comply with the Parents’ request. These evaluations
were conducted after the PPT where the Parents rejected the IEP proposed by the
Board, (P-14, Testimony of Parents’ Neuro—psychologist)

Villa Maria created an IEP for the 2010-2011 school year. The administrator was of
the opinion that the Student needs a small structured program where she will feel
conﬁdent. The Student’s language program was modiﬁed by having her write
different words than the other students, but words that used the same sounds. It was
recommended that the Student use a laptop (Testimony of AVM)

On June 21, 2010, the PPT met to review the evaluations administered to the
Student and present an appropriate educational program. A draft IEP had been sent
to the Parents prior to the PPT date. Villa Maria teachers participated in the PPT via
telephonic conference. Goals and objectives have been written to address the areas
of weakness that were noted in the Studentrfrom the evaluations and observations.
The goals addressed the Student’s reading e'omprehension, vocabulary and syntax.

(B61)

The speech and language pathologist would work with the Student on goals 1
through 7 of her 2010-201 1 IEP. The pathologist would be going into the regular
education classroom and address any needs the Student would be having in a real
life situation. One of the purposes of working with the Student in the regular
education setting is to teach the Student to work through distractions as she would
need to do in the real life setting. The 2010-201 1 would be appropriate for the
Student because it would meet her needs based on testing, observations and the
neuropsychological report from the Board’s psychologist, (B-S, Testimony of

BSLP)

The Student’s educational program at the Board would utilize assistants who are an
extension of the BSLP. The assistant or para cannot do evaluations. They would
implement what has been designed by the BSLP. They cannot implement anything
new and are strictly supervised by the BSLP. The State Department of Education
has guidelines for speech assistants. They cannot provide initial instructions. The
Student’s behavior impacts how instructions are delivered, but the environment can
be adapted so the Student can be successful. The Student’s behaviors were not

inappropriate but she was making progress during the 2008-2009 school year.
(Testimony of CREC Consultant)

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12‘0004

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1.

The Student qualiﬁes for, and is entitled to receive, a free and appropriate public
education with special education and related services under the provisions of state
and federal laws CGS § IO~76, et seq. and the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act ("IDEA") 20 USC. § 1401, et seq.

The Easton Board of Education has the burden of proving the appropriateness of the
child's program or placement, which burden must be met by a preponderance of the
evidence. Conn. Reg. § 10-76h-14(a); P. exrel Mr. P, v‘ Newington Bd. 0fEduc.,
512 F.Supp.2d 89, 99 (D.Conn. 2007). =

A parent or a public agency may ﬁle a due process complaint on any of the matters
described in 34 CFR. §300.503(a)(1) and (2) (relating to the identiﬁcation,
evaluation or educational placement of a child with a disability, or the provision of
FAPE to the child), The due process complaint must allege a violation that occurred
not more than two years before the date the parent or public agency knew or should
have known about the alleged action that forms the basis of the due process
complaint, or, if the State has an explicit time limitation for ﬁling a due process
complaint under this part, in the time allowed by that State law, except that the
exceptions to the timeline described in §300151 1(f) apply to the timeline in this
section. 34 C.F.R‘ §300.507.

IDEA opens the door of public education to children with disabilities. Board of
Educ oflhe Hendrick Hudson Cem‘. Sch. Dist. v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176, 192 (1982).
Under IDEA, a local education agency (LEA), such as the Board, must provide a
FAPE to each qualifying student in the least restrictive environment, including
special education and related services. 20 U,S.C. § 1401(18)

Under the Supreme Court test established by Board of Education v‘ Rowley, 45 8
U.S. 176, 203 (1982), FAPE consists of educational instruction speciﬁcally
designed to meet the unique needs of the handicapped child, and related services as
are necessary to permit the child to beneﬁt from the instruction. FAPE is not
required to maximize the potential of each child; however, it must be sufﬁcient to
confer educationaI beneﬁt. Id. at 200. The Rowley standard is satisﬁed by providing
meaningfuI access to educational opportunities for the disabled child. [(1 at 192.
The Rowley coun determined that the IDEA requires school districts to provide a
"basic ﬂoor of opportunity" consisting of "access to specialized instruction and
related services which are individually designed to provide educational benefit to
the handicapped child." 1d at 201. The Supreme Court found Congress' intent in
passing the IDEA was "more to open the door of public education to handicapped
children on appropriate terms than to guarantee any particular level of education
once inside." [(1 at 192‘

10

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0004

6. However, the Rowley requirement of consideration of the uniqueneeds of the
handicapped child does require consideration of the child‘s capacity to learn. Nein v.
Greater Clark County School Corporation, 95 F.Supp.2d 961, 973 (SD. Ind. 2000).
The requirement of "some educational benefit" requires more than a "trivial" beneﬁt
but not a maximization of the potential of a handicapped child. NJ v, Northwest R-
] SchooIDisrricr, 2005 US. Dist. LEXIS 24673, 22 (ED. Mo. 2005).

7. Under Rowley, there are two components to the FAPE analysis, one procedural and
the other substantive. An educational program can be set aside for failure to provide
FAPE 0n procedural grounds under three circumstances: (1) where the procedural
inadequacies have "compromised the pupil's right to an appropriate education"; (2)
when the district's conduct has "seriously hampered the parents' opportunity to
participate in the formulation process"; or (3) when the procedural failure has
resulted in "a deprivation of educational beneﬁts." IndependenlSchool Districl N0.
283 v. SD, 88 F.3d at 556. Where this type of harm is found, the substantive
question of whether the IEP provided F APE is not addressed by the hearing panel,
W.B. v. TargetRange SchoolDisn-z'ct, 960 F.2d 1479, 1485 (9th Cir. 1991).
Assuming no denial of FAPE 0n procedural grounds, the analysis turns to the
substance of whether the IEP provides FAPE as deﬁned by the Rowley standard and
"whether a proposed IEP is adequate and appropriate for a particular child at a ‘
given point in time." Rowley, 458 US. at 200; Town ofBurlington v. Dept, of I
Education, 736 F.2d 773, 788 (lst Cir. 1984), aﬂ’d 471 US. 359 (I985). ,

8. In their request for due process the Parents did not allege any procedural Violations.
In their Post TriaI Briefs Page 7 Paragraph 12, the Parents present the issue that the
eligibility determination made by the Board in the PPT of June 2010 was faulty in
that the ,” use of one singular testing instrument” violates IDEA and does not give
an “accurate picture of the [Student’s] skiII level.” A party requesting an impartiaI
hearing may not raise issues at the impartial hearing that were not raised in its |
original due process complaint notice unless the Other party agrees (20 U.S.C. § I
1415(f)(3)(B); 34 C,F.R. §§ 300.507(d)(3)(i), 300.511(d). The Board needs the
opportunity to be able to present evidence to refute these allegations. The Parents’
cite, Boyertown Area School Dislrict, 112 LRP 2673, 12/26/1; as authority for this i
determination. 1n Boyertown, the Student had not been classiﬁed as eligible to
receive special education and related services and was seeking a determination that i
he was eligible to receive FAPE as deﬁned in IDEA. Therefore, the use of one '
singular instrument to make a determination of eligibility was not appropriate. In
this matter, it was not an eligibility determination but an issue of placement. In this
matter, the evaluations that were sought were with the consent and knowledge of
the Parents and more than one evaluation was done. There were occupational
therapy, physical therapy, speech and language therapy evaluations as well as an
evaluation by the speciaI education teacher; in addition, the Student had had prior
testing. (Findings of Facts # 29). The Parents aISo had their occupational therapist
administer an evaluation of the Student. This new procedural Violation, even if it
had been raised properly, would have been found to be without merit,

11

 

March 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120004

10.

111

12.

The 2nd prong of Rowley, id._ addresses the substantive question of whether the IEP
provided FAPE. In order to decide the appropriateness of the IEP one must view it
as, “a snapshot, not a retrospective. In striving for ‘appropriateness’, an IEP must
take into account what was, and was not, objectively reasonable when the snapshot
was taken, that is, at the time the IEP was promulgated.” DR and DE, on behalf
ofNF, v. Ramapo Central School District, 403 F3d. 595 (2nd. Circuit 2005)

There is no one standard for determining what constitutes a meaningful educational
beneﬁt. The Student’s capabilities, intellectual progress and what the LEA has
offered must be considered along with grade promotions and test scores in
determining whether the program offered is reasonably calculated to confer a
nontrivial or meaningful educationa1 beneﬁt to the Child. See, e.g‘ Hall, 774 F.2d at
635. Objective factors such as passing marks and advancement from grade to grade
can be indicators of meaningful educational beneﬁts but are not in and of
themselves dispositive. See, e.gt, Mrs, B. vs MilfordBd. ofEduc., 103 F.3d 1120

(2nd Cir 1997).

During the 2008-2009 school year, the Parents were concerned with the Students’
behavioral issues and the possibility of a reduction of the Student’s speech and
language goals. In response to the Parents’ concerns, the Board agreed to an FBA;
as a result of the FBA, a BIP was created and behavioraI/social goals were added to
the Students’ IEP (Findings of Fact Nos. 12 and 14) Before the new IEP could be
put in effect, the Parents unilateraUy placed the Student at Villa Maria for the 2009~
2010 school year (Findings of Fact No. 15). The Student was making meaningful
progress during the 2008-2009 school year at the Board’s school, While at Villa
Maria, the Student’s behavior, with the addition of social/ behavioral goals,
improved but she did not master one of her goals at Villa Maria during the 2009-
2010 school year even though they were to 'be mastered in one year. (F indings of

F act Nos. 15 and 20). When Villa Maria added behavioral/social goals to the
Student’s service plan, the Student’s behavior problems and anxiety were reduced.
The program offered by the Board at the February 19, 2009 PPT, before the
unilateral placement [0 Villa Mara, as well as the program for the 2010—201 1 school
year, contained behavioral goals that had been created as the result of an FBA. The
behavioral goals created by the Board cou1d have also reduced the Student’s
behavioral issues and her anxiety and allowed the Student to continue making
progress in an environment that included nondisabled peers.

The Parents are not in agreement with paraprofessionals providing services to the
Student, but at Villa Maria the Student was receiving assistance from a tutor during
her math class. (Findings of Fact No. 22) The Parents’ concern about the Board’s
use of a paraprofessional is understandable because one always wants the best for
their children, especially when they have special needs, The Board has placed
controls over what the paraprofessional can do and they are strictly supervised by
the speech and language pathologist (Findings of Fact No. 36) to ensure that the
Student is on track and can continue to receive the necessary instructions to make
progress in her goals and objectives.

12

 

March 15, 2012 . Final Decision and Order 12-0004

13.

The Board’s evaluations and observations provided them with a clear picture of the
Student’s needs for the 2010—201 1 school year. (Findings of Fact No. 29, 31, 24 and
35). The testimony provided by the Board’s witnesses gave credence to the Board’s
contention that the Student would make progress with the IEP offered by the PPT
for the 2010-201 1 school year. The program at the Board’s school would be the
least restrictive environment as she would be with nondisabled peers in part of her
school day, The program offered by the Board, with the related services, would
have provided the Student with FAPE in the LRE.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

The program offered by the Board for the 2010—201 1 school year was appropriate
and would have provided the Student with FAPE in the LRE.

Since the program offered by the Board for the 2010—2011 school year was
appropriate, the Parents are not entitled to 'reimbursement for the cost of the
unilateral placement of the Student for the 2010-201 1 school year or the ESY
program for the summer of 2010.

The Parents are not entitled to reimbursement for the Student’s private speech

and language, occupational therapy and physical therapy services during the
2010—2011 school year.

13

