June 6, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0398

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Bloomfield Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent N0 appearance

Appearing on behalf ofthe Board Christine Chimii, Esq.
Chinni and Meuser
30 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Sylvia Ho, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Should a psychiatric evaluation be ordered?

SUMMARY:

The Board of Education (“BOB”) initiated a Request for Due Process Hearing on May 1, 2012. The
mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is June 15, 2012. A preheating conference was scheduled
for May 16, 2012 at which time neither patty appeared. The preheating conference was rescheduled to
May 22, 2012 at which time the Board appeared but the Parent did not. During the Prehearing
Conference, the Parent placed a call to the Hearing Ofﬁcer about the proceeding. Subsequently, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer received a return call from the Parent who advised the Hearing Ofﬁcer that he was not
interested in participating in mediation with the Board or in the hearing process.

A hearing was scheduled for June 5, 2012 and notice was sent to Parent by ceﬂiﬁed and regular mail.
On June 1, 2012, the Parent called the Hearing Ofﬁcer and requested a continuance of the hearing
because of a conﬂict in his work schedule. The Hearing Ofﬁcer obtained Parent’s email address and
informed the Parent that she could not engage in ex~parte communications. The Parent was directed to
contact the Board’s attorney. Subsequently, the Hearing Ofﬁcer emailed both palties regarding the
Parent’s request, memorialized the conversation, directed the Parent to the Board’s attorney and denied
the Parent’s request for postponement. On June 4, 2012, the Parent left a message on the Hearing
Officer’s voicemai] stating that he would not come to the hearing and would withdraw the Student

should the hearing be conducted.

The hearing was held on June 5, 2012. After the commencement of the hearing, the Board informed the
Hearing Ofﬁcer on the record that the Parent had withdrawn the Student from the Bloomﬁeld Schools
that morning, prior to the commencement of the hearing. A copy of the withdrawal of the Student was
submitted as Board Exhibit 1. The Board requested withdrawal of the Hearing Request because of the

 

June 6, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0398

mootness 0f the hearing issues caused by the withdrawal of the Student from the school system by
Parent. However, the Board wished to reserve its right to a future Request for Hearing on the same
issues should the Parent re—enroll the Student in the school system in any future school term.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer GRANTED the Board’s Request and DISMISSED the matter without prejudice to
be renewed should Parent x'e—enroll the Student in the school system.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The Board’s Request to Withdraw the Hearing Request is GRANTED and the matter is DISMISSED
with prejudice.

 

