June 4, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0357

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Newtown Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Phillip Cohn
Goldman Gruder & Woods LLC
200 Comlecticut Avenue
Norwa1k, CT 06854-7964

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Bet‘chem Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Janis C. Jerman, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney via
letter dated March 28, 2012.1 It was received by Board of Education’s (“BOE’s”) Attorney on March 28.
The thilty—day resolution period ended April 27 and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is

June 111

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on April 16. Attorney Laubin appeared on behalf of BOE.
No one appeared on behalf of Student. The Hearing Ofﬁcer e-mailed Student’s Attorney to remind him
of the pre-hearing conference. After waiting ten minutes, the pre-hearing conference proceeded with a
brief discussion. Shottly thereafter, Student’s Attorney e-mailed indicating that he did not receive the
notice due to difﬁculties with his e—mail address.

The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did BOB fail to satisfy its Child Find obligations and fail to identify Student as eligible for
special education services?

2. If the answer to Issue One, above, is answered in the afﬁrmative, what shall be the remedy?

3. Should BOE be required to reimburse Student’s Parents for Student’s placement at Greenbrier
Academy for Girls from July 201 1 through the 2011—12 school year?

BOE’s Attorney sought clariﬁcation as to what time period Issue One applies. Student’s Attorney was
requested to clarify as to whether Issue One should ask whether BOE failed to timely satisfy its Child
Find obligation or whether a time frame should be indicated in the framing of the Issue. Aﬁer receiving
a response from Student’s Attorney, the Hearing Ofﬁcer restated Issue One, The following issues were
identiﬁed:

' All dates are 2012 unless othenvise indicated.

June 4, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0357

1, Did BOE fail to satisfy its Child Find obligations and fail to timely identify Student as
eligible for special education sewices?

2. If the answer to Issue One, above, is answered in the afﬁrmative, what shall be the remedy?

3. Should BOE be required to reimburse Student’s Parents for Student’s placement at
Greenbrier Academy for Girls from July 2011 through the 201 1—12 school year?

The patties palticipated in mediation on May 2. The matter did not settle during mediation. Hearing was
scheduled for June 6. On June 1, Student’s Attorney ﬁled a written request that the matter be dismissed
with prejudice pursuant to a settlement agreement between the parties.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed with prejudice.

 

