November 8, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0005

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

East Hartford Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on Behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Attorney‘Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hanford, CT 061034919

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. IS therapeutic day placement at Lincoln Academy appropriate and will it provide the Student with a
free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE)? If not;

2. Will the residential placement of the student at The Learning Clinic provide the student with FAPE in
the LRE?

SUMMARY:

The Student has been identified with Autism and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate public
education (“FAPE”) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA)
20 U.S.C. §l401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a. At an IEP meeting, the Parent
rejected the District’s recommended residential placement. The Parent requested placement at Grove
School. The Board refused the Parent’s request and the Board filed for due process.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §10—76h and
related regulations, 20 United States C0de§l415(f) and related regulations, and in accordance with the
Uniform Administration Procedures Act, CGS §§4-176e t0 4-178, inclusive, and 4-18 la and 4-186t

On or about July 26, 201 1, the Parent received notice of the Board’s request for due process. An
impaltial hearing officer was appointed on July 26, 2011, the hearing ofﬁcer recused herself and a new
hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on July 26, 201 1. A pre-hearing conference was held on August 3, 201 1.
Hearing dates of September 28 and September 30, 201 1 were chosen by the patties.

The mailing ol‘ the Final Decision and Order was extended thirty days on the record on the last day 01‘
hearing with the agreement of all parties, in order to accommodate the mailing of the F inal Decision and
Order. The mailing date ofthe Final Decision and Order is November 8, 201 1.

 

November 8, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0005

This Final Decision and Order sets fotth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference cettain
exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All
evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent that the summary, procedural
history and ﬁndings offact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered and vice
versa. SAS Institute Inc. v‘ S, & H. Compuler Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816 (M.D.Tenn. 1985) and
Bonnie Ann F.“ Callallen Independenl School Board, 835 F.Supp. 340 (S.D.Tex. 1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

11 The Student is diagnosed with Asperger’s Disorder and Non-vei'bal Learning Disot'deix The
Student has been found eligible to receive special education and related services under IDEA.
(Testimony Of Supervisor of Special Education, Board’s Exhibit1 No. 14)

2. In May 2009, the doctor from PATH Outpatient Services noted that the Student was having
suicidal ideation without clear intent and was then struggling with the setting being offered. The
doctor strongly recommended a residential placement for the Student. (B-1 4)

3, The Parent requested a PPT and on May 5, 2009 the Board complied with Parent’s request, The
PPT recommended a clinical day program which the Parent rejected. The Parent requested a
residential placement and the Board refused the Parent’s request. The Board agreed to continue
homebound tutoring. The Board’s consultant psychiatrist recommended psychiatric and
psychological evaluations once the Student starts a clinical day school program. The Parent agreed
to the evaluations at Grace Webb School, a clinical day school program, but did not follow through
with the placement. The Student did not visit any of the placements recommended by the Board.

(13-5)

4, On or about September 8, 2009, the doctor from PATH Outpatient Services sent another letter
advising that the Student had 2 additional hospitalizations since his original letter and again
strongly recommended residential placement for the Student, (B-7)

5. The Student was placed at Grace Webb School for the purpose of re—evaluations and to determine
placement. The Student attended two days and refused to continue attending the school. The Board
agreed that the Student’s refusal to attend school would require them to look for residential
placement in order to conduct re-evaluations and determine his placement. The Student remains on
homebound tutoring until a placement has been found. (13—9)

6, The Student was referred to the Northwest Village School but a placement could not be secured.
Another school with a residential component was recommended but the Parent refused the
placement. The Parent agreed to refer the Student to Lincoln Academy, a program provided by
CREC (Capital Regional Education Council). (B—1 1)

7. The special education teacher at CREC conducted a general obsewation of the student and
recommended that the Student would beneﬁt from a highly structured learning environment with a

' Hereafter Parent’s Exhibits will be noted as “P” followed by the exhibit number and Board Exhibits will be noted with a
“B" followed by the exhibit number.

November 8, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0005

11.

13.

14.

strong clinical component, small group instruction and having assignments and activities broken
into smaller components. He should have structured timelines and plans for any changes in his
educational placement (B-1 3)

The Student was given a psychological evaluation at CREC. The Student was found to have
problems in his executive function and processing, and social-emotional disorder: The evaluator
was of the opinion that the Student could qualify for special education under the classiﬁcation of
Emotional Disturbance. The evaluator recommended that the Student requires an educational
setting with a high level of structure and support and small classroom size. The evaluator
recommended that the Student be given regular and plamled check-ins with school personnel in
order to monitor his feelings and adjust the in~school environment if necessary. It was
recommended that a residential program should be explored. The exposure to a residential program
could be stressful for the Student, since it would require him to be away from home;
hospitalization could be part of the adj ustment process. (13—14)

The psychiatric evaluation recommended a highly structured environment for the Student in a self
contained classroom with a low staff to student ratio. (B-16)

The Student’s attendance at Lincoln Academy at CREC progressed from a single class to the
inclusion of lunch so that he could eat in the school. There was discussion about extending the
diagnostic placement if it continued to proceed well. (B-lS)

On or about April 16, 2010 the Student stopped attending Lincoln Academy, Prior to his abrupt
departure, he had been attending the school as a fulltime student for 4 days. The Student was
compliant with his work and although there appeared to be concerns about his behavior it was
found to be appropriate. The Parent requested Devereux as a placement for the Student. (B—20)

At the May 26, 2010 PPT, the Parent requested that Devereux be removed as a placement for the
Student. The Parent requested that The Learning Clinic (TLC) be considered as an appropriate
placement for the Student. The Board agreed to forward an application packet to TLC in order to
have it considered as a day placement for the Student. TLC would not accept the Student in its day
program because of his school avoidance behavior. They were of the opinion that he required a
higher level of programming than the day program would offer. TLC was willing to consider a
residential program for the Student. (B-20 & B-2l)

On September 16, 2010 the TLC admission team met with the Student and mother. They were of
the opinion that their program structure, residential living program, psycho-educational orientation
and cognitive behavior multi—modal intervention model would be helpful to the Student. (B—22)

The PPT met on November 4, 2010 and agreed to support a residential program for the Student at
TLC. The Parent refused the placement at TLC and recommended placement at Grove School. The
Parent felt more comfortable with the staff at Grove School and had better rapport with them.
There was also a golf course close to the school that might be of interest to the Student. The Board
was concerned that they did not have access to the Student and were making the referral based on
Parent information. The Student was close to his 18Ih birthday and the Board wanted to inform him
of his rights. The Board proposed that the school psychologist speak with the Student to identify

November 8, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12-0005

15.

16.

17,

18.

19.

20.

the Student’s interests and desires. The Parent refused to allow the Board to speak with the Student
and required that all communications be in writing. The paities agree that homebound tutoring is
not appropriate. The Student has continued in the homebound tutoring program until a proper
program is found for him. (Testimony of Mother, B-23)

Dr. Joseph Brown, a licensed clinical psychologist, had been treating the Student for ﬁve years.
The doctor recommended a residential program for the Student. He expressed the opinion that the
Grove School would be a “good match” because the Student favored attending the school. He was
of the opinion that the Student would not attend TLC because he had already expressed his
disinterest in the school. The doctor opined that a residential therapeutic environment would meet
the Student’s needs and a day program had already proven to be highly unsuccessful. These
recommendations were reviewed and discussed at a February 2, 201 1 PPT. The team was of the
opinion that TLC was the appropriate placement but a referral packet was sent to the Grove School
as requested by the Parent. (B—25, B—27)

The Student requires a small environment where he can receive individualized attention and
instruction. He does not like noise or chaos although this is not a behavior issue. He needs a place
where he can go when he becomes anxious. The Student would beneﬁt from areas he enjoys. He is
verbal and enjoys the computer. The only way the Student can move forward in his education is in
a residential program where he can receive support. (Testimony of Supervisor of Special
Education)

The Supervisor of Special Education met with the counseling director, the residential director and
the academic director at The Learning Clinic (TLC). After the visit she was of the opinion that this
was the appropriate placement for Student. TLC could offer an academic day program and
extended day program and also has a bridge program where the Student could obtain college
credits. The program at TLC could assist the Student to become an independent person.
(Testimony of Supewisor of Special Education)

The Student was afraid to go to CREC because of the Violence he perceived and obsewed. His
ambition is to be a psychiatrist. He understands the importance of an education. He does not want
to go to TLC because he feels it would be too restrictive. The Student is willing to go to a day
program. The Student was under the impression that the Grove School was an option and he was
not aware that Dr. Brown was recommending a residential program for the Student. (Testimony of
Student)

The Grove School responded to the referral of the Student. At the time of the referral, the school
did not have any placements available. (B~28, Testimony ot‘Director 0f Pupil Sewices)

The PPT met on J une 17, 201 1 to discuss the Student’s placement and the lack of a placement at
the Grove School for the Student. The Parent did not attend but sent a message through her
advocate that she would call and ask for a postponement. The PPT went forward; 40 minutes into
the PPT the Parent called and requested a postponement. The Student’s IEP was not changed at
this PPT but the Board recommended that the Student be placed at TLC‘ The PPT was informed
that the Student had been advised of his rights when he reached the age of eighteen. (Testimony of
Director of Pupil Services, B-29)

 

November 8, 201 1

21.

Final Decision and Order 120005

On or about August 8, 201 1, the Grove School informed the Board that after ﬁnther consideration,
they did not have any placements available for the Student. They were of the opinion that they
could not meet the Student’s needs. (B—31)

CONCUSIONS OF LAW:

1.

The Student qualiﬁes for, and is entitled to receive, a free and appropriate public education (FAPE)
with special education and related services provided under the provisions of state and federal laws
(CGS § 10-76, et seq. and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §
1401, et seq.).

IDEA opens the door of public education to children with disabilities. Board QfEduc. oflhe
Hendrick Hudson Cent. Sch. Dist. v. Rowley, 458 US. 176, 192 (1982). Under IDEA, a local
educational agency (LEA), such as the Board, must provide to each qualifying student a FAPE in
the least restrictive environment. 20 U.S.C. § 1401(19).

The purpose of IDEA is to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them FAPE
that emphasizes special education and related sewices ”designed to meet their unique needs and
prepare them for further education, employment and independent living" and to "ensure that the
rights of children with disabilities and parents of such children are protected ..." 20 U .S.C. §
1400(d)(1).

An ”appropriate" education is one that is reasonably calculated to confer some educational beneﬁt.
See Board of Educ. of the Hendrick Hudsnn Central Sch.Disf v. Rowley, 458 US. 176, 206-7
(1982); Walczak v. Florida Union Free Sch. Dist. 142 F.3d 1 19,130 (2d Cir. 1998).

Under the Supreme Court test established by Board ofEdl/cafion v. Rowley, 458 US. 176, 203
(1982), FAPE consists of educational instruction speciﬁcally designed to meet the unique needs 01‘
the handicapped child, and related services as are necessary to permit the child to beneﬁt from the
instruction. FAPE is not required to maximize the potential ofeach child; however, it must be
sufﬁcient to confer educational beneﬁt. 1d. at 200. The Rowley standard is satisﬁed by providing
meaningful access to educational opportunities for the disabled child. [(1. at 192. The Rowley Court
determined that the IDEA requires school districts to provide a "basic [1001‘ of oppommity"
consisting of "access to specialized instruction and related services which are individually
designed to provide educational beneﬁt to the handicapped child." [(1. at 201. The Supreme Coult
found Congress‘ intent in passing the IDEA was "...m01'e to Open the door ot‘publie education to
handicapped children on appropriate terms than to guarantee any paitieular level of education once
inside." 1d. at 192.

However, the Rowley requirement of consideration of the unique needs of the handicapped child
does require consideration of the child‘s capacity to learn. Nein v. Greater Clark County School
Corporation, 95 F.Supp.2d 961, 973 (SD. 1nd. 2000). The requirement of "some educational
beneﬁt” requires more than a "trivial" beneﬁt but not a maximization of the potential of a

 

November 8, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12-0005

10.

11.

handicapped child. NJ. v. Northwest R—I School District, 2005 US. Dist. LEXIS 24673, 22 (ED.
Mo. 2005).

Under Rowley, there are two components to the FAPE analysis: one procedural and the other
substantive. An educational program can be set aside for failure to provide FAPE on procedural
grounds under three circumstances: (1) where the procedural inadequacies have ”compromised the
pupil's right to an appropriate education"; (2) when the district's conduct has “seriously hampered
the parents‘ opp01tunity t0 paiticipate in the formulation process"; or (3) when the procedural
failure has resulted in "a deprivation of educational benefits." Independent School District No. 283
v. SD, 88 F.3d at 556. Where this type of harm is found, the substantive question of whether the
IEP provided FAPE is not addressed by the hearing panel. W. B. v. Target Range School District,
960 F.2d 1479, 1485 (9th Cir. 1991). Assuming no denial of FAPE on procedural grounds, the
analysis turns to the substance of whether the IEP provides FAPE as deﬁned by the Rowley
standard and "whether a proposed IEP is adequate and appropriate for a particular child at a given
point in time." Rowley, 458 US. at 200; Town QfBurlinglon v. Dept. of Education. 736 F.2d 773,
788 (1st Cir. 1984). qff’d 471 US. 359 (1985).

In this matter the ﬁrst prong of Rowley has not been violated. There has been no evidence 01‘ any
procedural Violations committed by the Board.

In addressing the 2nd prong 0f Rowley, IDEA does not itself articulate any speciﬁc level of
educational beneﬁts that must be provided through an IEP. The Supreme Count, however, has
speciﬁcally rejected the contention that the “appropriate education” mandated by IDEA requires
states to “maximize the potential of handicapped children.” Walczak v. Florida Union Free School
District, 27 IDELR 1 135 (2d Cir. 1998), citing Rowley, supra. An appropriate public education
under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress, not regression. Id. The goal of IDEA is not to
maximize a special education child’s potential, but rather to provide access to public education for
such children. K.P. v. Juzwic, 891 F. Supp. 703, 718 (D.Conn. 1995) This access is considered a
“basic ﬂoor of oppottunity” for the students. Banks v. Danbury Board of Education, 238 F. Supp.
2d 428 [D. Conn. 2003].

There is no one standard for determining what constitutes a meaningful educational beneﬁt. The
Student’s capabilities, intellectual progress and what the LEA has offered must be considered
along with grade promotions and test scores in determining whether the program offered is
reasonabiy calculated to confer a nontrivial 0r meaningful educational beneﬁt to the child. See,
e.g., Hall, 774 F.2d at 635. Objective factors such as passing marks and advancement from grade
to grade can be indicators of meaningful educational beneﬁts but are not in and of themselves
dispositive. See, e.g., Mrs, B, v. Milford Bd. 0fEduc., 103 F.3d 1120 (2nd Cir. 1997).

In this matter the parties are in agreement that the Student’s current placement of homebound
tutoring is not appropriate. (Findings of Fact No.14).

The Board proposes a day program for the Student. On prior occasions, the Student had attended a
day program but aﬁer awhile refused to attend the program. (Findings of Fact Nos. 5 and 10), TLC
refused to accept the Student in their day program. (Findings of Fact No. 12). The Student’s doctor
recommended a therapeutic residential program and stated that a day program would not be

 

November 8, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0005

13.

14.

15.

successful. (Findings ol‘Fact No. 15). The Board’s proposal that the Student attend a day program
is not appropriate. The Student’s actions make his attendance at a day program highly
inappropriate and a guarantee of failure. Professionals who have seen the Student are in agreement
that a day program is not appropriate.

The parties are in agreement that a residential program is appropriate for the Student. The Parent
requests that the Student attend the Grove School. The Grove School has made it clear that it does
not have a placement or a program for the Student. (Findings of Fact No. 21). An order to require
the Board to send the Student to the Grove School would be inappropriate as the Grove School has
already stated that they do not have a place for the Student; the hearing ofﬁcer has no authority to
require a private program to accept the Student.

The Board has proposed TLC as a residential placement for the Student. The Student is now of the
age to decide for himself whether 01' not he would attend any placement ordered by the hearing

of ﬁcer. In his testimony the Student demonstrated that he has very high ambitions for his life.

T hese can only be accomplished with an education. The Student’s concern with T LC as being
restrictive is correct. In the continuum of alternative placements, a residential program is one of the
most restrictive settings; however, in order to attain his goals, the Student requires a residential
setting. The Student’s doctor, the Board and even his Parent were looking for a residential setting.
(Findings of Fact Nos. 3, 14, 15 and 18). The Board’s request for placement at TLC is appropriate
and would provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE.

To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed herein, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The therapeutic day placement of the Student at Lincoln Academy is not appropriate and will not

provide the Student with FAPE in the least restrictive environment.

2. The residential placement of the Student at The Learning Clinic is appropriate and will provide the

Student with FAPE in the least restrictive environment.

 

