April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. New Haven Board of Education

Appearing on behalfof the Student: Attorney Rose Longo-McLean

John R. Williams & Associates
51 Elm Street, Suite 409
New Haven, CT 06510

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin

Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim

Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1.

Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 20] 1~12 school year is
appropriate;

If not, whether the Parent’s placement of the Student at Easton Country Day School is
appropriate, and shall be reimbursed;

Whether the Board shall provide for the cost Oftransportation to Easton Country Day
School, and the related services of a reading specialist, OT and PT;

Whether the Parent shall be reimbursed for the IEE;

Whether the Board committed procedural violations in that the Parent was not provided
an opportunity to participate in the PPT meeting of September 6, 2011;

Whether the Student shall be provided an auditory processing evaluation;
Whether the Student shall receive an assistive technology re—evaluation;

Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education.

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

 

 

SUMMARY:

The 16 year old Student, who has complex and puzzling maladies that have evaded deﬁnitive
diagnosis, has been identiﬁed as eligible for special education under the category of other health
impaired. The Board offered the Student an IEP at the Board high school for the 201 1—12 school
year. The Parent brought this request for hearing, seeking placement of the Student at Easton
Country Day School, including cost of transportation and related sewiees. She alleged that the
Board committed procedural Violations in that she was not allowed to participate in a PPT
meeting, requested reimbursement for an IEE, and sought an auditory processing evaluation and
an assistive technology re-evaluation.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board received this request for hearing on September 26, 2011[H,O.-1] and a prehearing
conference convened on October 11, At the preheating conference, the parties had reported that
they agreed to mediate this matter, and the ﬁrst hearing date was scheduled for November 29.
The parties did not subsequently mediate this matter.

The Board scheduled and convened a resolution session on October 4, but the Parent failed to
attend the session and conﬁrmed that she did not want to attend the resolution session.
[Testimony Parent; Exhibits B—l72, B—173, B—174, B—175, B—177, B—178]

Requests for extension of the mailing date of the decision were granted to allow the parties to
schedule additional hearing dates and submit closing argument.

Prior to the ﬁrst hearing date, the Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss the compensatory education
claim if it related to any other school years. The Parent ﬁled an objection to the Motion to
Dismiss. The Board’s Panial Motion to Dismiss was granted on December 5. The compensatory
education set forth in the issues was a remedy related solely to the 2011—12 school year.

The hearing convened on nine hearing dates from November 29, 2011 to March 5, 2012. On one
of the hearing dates, January 3, the Parent did not appear as it was reported that she was
attending some doctors’ appointments for her other children. Counsel for the Parent was not
aware of any details regarding these appointments and provided no documentation thereof, but
the Board’s counsel did not object to the continuation of the hearing to the next scheduled date
since the Parent was to be the next and ﬁnal witness for the Parent’s case.l

' Comments regarding the conducl of the proceedings Regs. Conn. Agencies é‘l 0—7611-l6(b)

From the ﬁrst day of hearing, continuing throughout the course of the hearing, counsel for the Parent and
the Parent were disrespectful to the hearing ofﬁcer and to the proceedings Counsel and the Parent would make
outbursts and asides as well as comment aﬁer rulings were made by the hearing ofﬁcer. The Parent also mocked the
process, refusing to answer yes and no questions, and repeatedly responding with uh huh 0r ah huh rather than yes or
no. When the Board counsel asked why she was having difﬁculty responding to the questions, the Parent
sarcastically responded that she had a medical condition that prohibited her from answering questions called “yeSv
ism.” The disrespectful and unprofessional conduct unnecessarily prolonged the hearing.

2

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

Written closing arguments were submitted by both parties on March 19, 2012.

The Parent’s witnesses were Chris Quirk, director of the high school program at Easton Country
Day School; Shelley Lacey—Castelot, education consultant from Literacy Solutions; Meryl
Aronin, speech/language pathologist; Theodore Zanker, psychiatrist; and the Parent.

The Board’s witnesses were Laura Evangelist, ACES OT; Lauren Evanovich, Board high school
special education teacher; Kimberly Hartmann, ACES OT/AT consultant; Jeffery Lowell, Board
school psychologist; Diane Henley, Board speech/language pathologist; and Patricia Moore,
Board supervisor of special education services.

The Parent submitted exhibits numbered P-1 through P—25. Objections were sustained to
Exhibits P-7, P-9, P-lO, P—12, P—17 pages 1-2, P—22 and these documents were not entered as full
exhibits. Objections were pending t0 Exhibits P-8, P—9, P—13, P-14, P—18, P-20, P—21 during the
course of the hearing so that the Parent had an opportunity to establish relevancy, foundation or
authenticity of the documents. As the Parent failed to address any of these exhibits during the
course of the hearing, the objections are sustained. The remaining exhibits were full exhibits.

The Board submitted exhibits number B—l through B-199, An objection to B—60 was pending at
the conclusion of the hearing, and that objection is sustained. A11 remaining exhibits were
entered as full exhibits.

A11 exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision.

To the extent that the procedural history, surnmaly and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. V. Callallen

Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(“CGS”) §10~76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(t) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (“UAPA”), CGS
§§ 4-176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4-1 81a and 4—186.

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1.

The Student is 16 years old and is currently attending the Parent’s unilateral placement at
Easton Country Day School approximately 2 t0 3 days per week. [Testimony Parent,
ECDS Director] As of the date when the school representative testiﬁed at the hearing,
the Day School was looking into possible Video conferencing for the Student on the other
days, but it was not available for the Student at that time. [Testimony ECDS Director]

The Parent testified that she takes the Student into Easton Country Day School on
Tuesdays and Fridays and on some Mondays, but doesn’t take her every day because she
has a car with 150,000 miles on it and she has a day care. [Testimony Parent]

It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related sewices
under the categcny of Other Health Impaired (0H1). [Testimony Parent, Exhibit B~157]

The Student has a complicated and complex medical history which must be discussed as
these issues implicate her education in various ways. Some of the maladies are
suspected, but not conﬁrmed. She reportedly suffers from fatigue and dystonia, a
neurologically based movement disorder. She has been diagnosed as bipolar and the
Student may have a mitochondrial disorder. There are concerns that there are some
effects of polypharmacy, due to the Student’s medications. There has also been a concern
that the Student’s maladies are related to Munchausen by proxy syndrome. [Testimony
Psychiatrist, Board Supervisor; Exhibits B-126, B-127, B—133] There is no consensus as
to the Student’s diagnoses. [Testimony Parent]

The Student’s psychiatrist, who has been treating the Student since 2005, testiﬁed that he
initially thought the Student had bipolar disorder with a great deal of irritability. She
started to develop neurological signs which the psychiatrist thought might be early signs
of tardive dyskinesia. The psychiatrist stopped the Student’s prescription for Sei'oquel,
but her condition worsened. The Student continued on Lithium and Abiiify. According
to the psychiatrist, Lithium has a limited therapeutic safety range, and if these levels are
not maintained there can be serious neurological symptoms, including confusion and
muscular dystonia, abnormal movements of the muscles 01‘ abnonnal spasms of the muscles
which can be as mild as facial ties to more severe muscle spasms. The psychiatrist noted
that he saw facial twitches on the Student that were consistent with dystonia. [Testimony
Psychiatrist]

It was suspected that the Student had a mitochondrial disorder, a medical disorder that is
not an area of expertise of the psychiatrist In this disorder, there are toxic metabolic
brain problems, The psychiatrist reported that the family has applied for acceptance into
a study with the NIH rare diseases program, but no futther evidence was submitted
regarding the status ot‘this submission [Testimony Psychiatrist]

The Student’s psychiatrist continued to believe that the Student met the diagnostic criteria
for bipolar disorder, mixed, with intelmittent psychotic features, but he wasn’t sure whether
there was an underlying genetic or biological predisposition. He also was considering that

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

10.

11.

12.

13.

the symptoms that look like bipolar disorder might be caused by the mitochondrial
abnormality. The Student has exhibited symptoms of significant mood instability and
irritability, ﬂuctuating with periods of signiﬁcant depression. The psychiatrist is unsure
whether these symptoms were a result of the bipolar disorder versus the organic brain
disorder, secondary to the mitochondrial malfunction. [Testimony Psychiatrist]

The Student’s complex issues have an impact on her education. People with mitochondrial
disorder have problems with fatigue, dystonia, and visual acuity and ﬂuctuation Children
with bipolar disorder quite oﬁen have executive functioning issues, and it is quite common
for these children to have difﬁculty with written expression, [Testimony Psychiatrist]

During the 2010—11 school year, the Student was receiving homebound tutoring at the
request of the Parent and with the agreement of the Board. [Exhibit Bhl 15]

In January 201 1, the Planning and Placement Team (PPT) convened to review the
Students evaluations, conduct an annual review and for transition planning. At that time,
the team reviewed the occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) evaluations.
The OT evaluation identiﬁed that the Student demonstrated the underlying sensory and
motor foundations necessary to participate in school based tasks. The PT assessment
suggested that the Student was able to transfer from the wheelchair independently, able to
sit to supine independently, able to sit unsupported with feet on ﬂoor for two minutes and
to ambulate with close supervision of a therapist. Due to unsuccessful attempts to
coordinate meeting times with the Parent and the Student, the assistive technology (AT)
and psychological evaluations were not complete by this PPT meeting.[Testimony ACES
OT; Exhibit B-109]

At that time there were no concerns expressed by the Parent as to the reading instruction,
and no request for a reading evaluation, [Testimony Board Supervisor]

In January 201 l, the Area Cooperative Educational Services (ACES) AT consultant was
asked to re-evaluate the Student’s AT needs. The referral questions addressed the need to
access and complete homebound work and the Student’s need for voice recognition
assistance due to fatigue. The AT consultant recommended that the Student have a new
laptop with a full version of Microsoft Ofﬁce including the voice to text capabilities,
Excel and PowerPoint, with internet access and a noise canceling microphone; a digital
tape recorder; training to set up and use the technology and a reevaluation of the
technology needs when the Student’s environment changes from homebound to a
different environment. [Testimony ACES AT Consultant, ExhibitB—112]

A psychoeducational evaluation was conducted in January and February 2011, with the
repent ﬁnalized in mid-March. The Student was administered the Weschler Intelligence
Scale for Children ~ Fourth Edition (WlSC-IV) to assess her cognitive ability, which was
found to be in the average range of functioning with a full scale IQ of 94. The Student
was also administered the Weschler Individual Achievement Test ~ Third Edition
(WlAT—lll) to assess her academic achievement. Her composite scores were average on
Oral Language (SS 95), low average on Total Reading (SS 86), average on Basic Reading

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

14.

15.

16.

(SS 95), below average on Reading Comprehension & Fluency (SS 80), below average
on Written Expression (SS 81) and below average on Mathematics (SS 84). [Exhibit B—
115]

The PPT convened on March 15, 2011 to review the evaluations, review/revise the
Individualized Education Program (1131’) and for transition planning. The PPT reviewed
the Student’s psychoeducational testing, the PT consultation and the AT assessment The
school nurse reported on the communication regarding the Student’s medical status from
her physician, Dr. Gould. The repon from Dr. Gould was that the Student has medical
issues, but whether they are mitochondrial in origin, due to another malady ahd/or
complicated by the regimen of medications was not known. The PPT agreed that the
Student continues to be eligible for special education under the primary disability of OH]
and that she will continue homebound services. No other Options were considered and
rejected at this PPT meeting. [Exhibit B—l 15]

In March 201 1, a few days after the PPT meeting, the Parent requested an evaluation in
reading and writing skills in an email to the Board. This was the ﬁrst time she brought up
this request. The school psychologist had evaluated these areas by the time of the email
from the Parent, which results were reviewed at the PPT meeting on March 15‘
[Testimony Board Supervisor, Exhibits B-l l8, B-l 15]

A decision was issued by Hearing Ofﬁcer Gelfman on April 20, 201 1 in the case ﬁled by
the Parent. The Final Decision and Order stated:

a. Since homebound instruction was approved by the PPT 0n 1 1/9/2010, the issue 01‘
the Student’s stay put placement is moot.

b. Since homebound instruction was provided at the 11/9/2010 PPT meeting, this
issue is moot and therefore dismissed.

e. While there has been a problem of Student’s fatigue limiting the amount 01‘
homebound instmction, such instinction should have included Spanish as
requested by the Parent. In order to make up lost time in Spanish, the Board shall
devise an extended year program for the 2011, to provide Spanish instruction to
the Student sufficient to meet credit requirements.

(1. The PPT shall consult with the Student’s pediatrician concerning her availability
for additional homebound instruction. Such consultation may be in person at a
PPT meeting 01‘ though the school nurse.

et Since almost all of the equipment recommended by the AT evaluators has been
provided (01‘ is on order) this issue is moot and is dismissed.

f. Student has received AT, OT and PT evaluations and consultations, This issue is
moot and is dismissed.

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

17.

18.

19.

20.

g. Student has received counseling. However, she remains isolated from her peers.
The PPT shall explore the possibilities of an electronic connection via her school-
provided computer that would enable her to observe and participate in one class
on a regular basis,

h. The adaptations, modiﬁcations and accommodations documented in the Student’s
current IEP are sufficient.

i. Testing accommodations have been provided in Student’s IEP, including the
opportunity to take district wide tests apart from other students and to extend the
time for completing the tests. She also has been allowed to use her computer, and
when necessary to have test questions read to her. The accommodations shall be
considered at each PPT meeting, and updated as necessary, [Exhibit B-122, Final
Decision and Order, Case No. 11—0144]

On May 4 the Student’s physician, Dr. Gould, emailed notiﬁcation to the Board that she
was no longer the Student’s pediatrician. [Exhibit B-125]

Dr. Maddox drafted a correspondence to the Board dated May 9 in suppOIt 0f the
continuance of the Student’s homebound instruction for the remainder of the current
2010—11 school year, indicating that he remained hopeful that the Student could be
integrated back into the school system in the next school year, [Exhibit B—126]

Dr. Maddox drafted another correspondence related to the May 9 “encounter date” which
was dated May 19, and received by the Board on May 20. He noted that he is currently
the Student’s pediatrician, and had previously been her pediatrician from spring 2009 to
spring 2010. He noted that her medical diagnoses at that time were “Asthma, Bipolar
disease, Movement Disorder NOS, she has cervical vertebral spine abnormality of
unknown etiology and has had abnormal levels 01‘ organic acids in her blood and urine
which have led some specialists to believe she has [g]1utaric [a]cide1‘mia while some do
not.” [Exhibit B-127]

The school nurse drafted an updated health repoxt for the Student on May 19, 2011. The
health problems noted were “[s]igniﬁcant medical history for asthma, juvenile bipolar
disorder, ADHD, GERD, dystonia, severe muscle cramps, dyslexia, conversion disorder,
metabolic disorder, possible glutaric acidermia Type 1, possible mitochondrial disorder,
ataxia, abnormal posturing, cervical lordosis and neurodegeneration of discs at multiple
levels.” Her medical consultants/providers identiﬁed included Dr. Stephen Maddox,
current pediatrician; Dr. Charles Duncan, YNHH, pediatric neurology; Dr. Robert
Greenstein, UConn Health Center; Dr. Margaret Seashore, Yale, Genetics; Dr. Richard
Kelley, John Hopkins, Metabolic Depaltment, Dr. Theodore Zanker, psychiatrist; Dr.
Szekely, Yale, Genetics and Neurology Department/Pain Management; Dr. Graf, Yale,
Neurology; Dr. Diluna, Yale, Neurology; Dr, Brenda McClain, Yale, Pain Management,
Dr. Bacai, Ophthalmologist and Dr, Leisel Gould, former pediatrician. The school nurse
noted that there was a documented concern of polypharmacy use by some of the
consulting physicians which could contribute to the confusing array ofclinical symptoms
that the Student exhibits, challenging a deﬁnitive diagnosis of “presumed mitochondrial

7

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

disease.” At this time, the Student’s cun‘ent medications included Lithium, Clonipine,
Benadryl, Ativan, Zantac, Singular, Zyrtec, Cogenti, L—Dopa (L—Dopa reportedly taken
only a few days). [Exhibit B—133]

The AT consultant held a training and consultation at the Student’s home on May 26,
Prior to this Visit, the Student’s laptop was set up for voice recognition, but in reviewing
the laptop it was found that the audio input was not being received or processed properly.
The AT consultant continued with the training, and thereafter took appropriate and
reasonable steps to troubleshoot the problem with the audio on the laptop, [Testimony
ACES AT Consultant, Exhibit B-136]

The PPT convened on May 31, 2011, to implement the decision and orders from Case
No. 11—0144. [Exhibits B—130, B—139] At the PPT meeting, the team recommended
continuation of the March 31, 2011 IEP until June 24, 201 1, extended school year (ESY)
in the area 01" Spanish in school beginning June 6, door to door transponation for the
duration of ESY, beginning 2011-12 school year with the current goals and objectives in
a school environment and scheduling of the next PPT meeting for September 6 to review
and revise the IEP. [Exhibit B-139]

At this PPT meeting, after a lot of discussion, the Parent said she wanted reading
assessments completed because the Student’s reading was below average. The Board
denied the request as the Board members of the PPT indicated that they had sufﬁcient
information from the psychoeducational evaluation completed by the school psychologist
as well as the other assessments. [Testimony Board Supewisor]

The Parent did not challenge the results of the school psychologist’s evaluation, and she
didn’t disagree with any of the Board’s evaluations. The papelwork from the May 31
PPT was revised to include the correction that the Parent requested an independent
reading evaluation, [Testimony Board Supervisor, Exhibit B—140]

Dr. Maddox, one of the Student’s physicians, submitted a letter after the May 31 PPT
meeting indicating that he was in favor of her attending school for a small ponion of the
day provided she has transportation to and from the building and doesn’t have to walk
extensively during the time period, and as long as she is allowed adequate test time
during the school session. [Exhibit B-141]

On July 6, the Board requested a special education due process hearing on the following
Issues:

a. Is the Board entitled to an order allowing the Board to proceed with a medical
evaluation of the Student by a physician designated by the Board in order to
provide the Student with FAPE?

b. Is the Board entitled to an order allowing the Board to proceed with a psychiatric
evaluation of the Student by a psychiatrist designated by the Board in order to
provide the Student with FAPE?

0. Was the academic achievement evaluation conducted by the Board appropriate to
assess the Student’s reading skills?

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

27.

28‘

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

d. If the Board’s achievement evaluation was not appropriate, is the Parent entitled
to an independent reading evaluation at public expense? [Exhibit B-l45, Case No.
12-009]

In 2011, the Student was seen by a physician at Yale who wanted the Student admitted in
order to come off all of her medications to allow him to evaluate her neurological condition.
The Parent disagreed with this, and the physician ﬁled a DCF Form 136 repott of suspected
child abuse or neglect. The psychiatrist submitted an afﬁdavit in July 201 1 in response to
the Form 136 report. In the afﬁdavit, Dr, Zanker opined that “i . . while anything is
possible, I think it’s very unlikely that this is a case of Munchausen’s by proxy.” [Testimony
Psychiatrist, Exhibit B—138]

At this time, the Yale physicians thought that a diagnosis of conversion disorder would be
appropriate for the Student. Conversion disorder is when people can develop similar
symptoms to dystonia, but they’re more related to some son of severe psychological stress
that presents itself as physical symptoms. In his afﬁdavit Dr. Zanker opined that. “. . , while
this is possible in [the Student’s] case (anything is possible), I don’t think this is likely.”
[Testimony Psychiatrist]

During the summer 201 1, the Student attended a summer program at a Board high school
for Spanish. The Student attended the summer school program for 11 days for her
Spanish course, and was compliant and exhibited the stamina to complete the lessons.
[Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit B—lSO]

The Parent had Miriam Cherkes-Julkowski, PhD. conduct an educational evaluation of
the Student during July and August 2011. Dr. Cherkes-Julkowski’s 110th more
significant deﬁcits than were noted in the psychoeducational evaluation, and
recommended a “carefully designed and orchestrated intervention” with a total school
environment for high functioning students who have learning disabilities with various
recommended interventions, instruction in decoding, reading comprehension suppott,
targeted response to ﬂuency, methodical program in instmction of math computations
and concepts, 21 speech/language evaluation and continued consulting with an AT and
OT. [Exhibit B-152]

The Student attended the ﬁrst day of the 2011—12 school year, September 1, under her
IEP for the previous year. Her hours included a modiﬁed day schedule which was going
to continue until the PPT meeting scheduled for September 6. The Student did not
attend the second day of school. [Testimony Special Education Teacher]

As previously planned in May, the PPT convened to review and revise the Student’s IEP
on September 6, 2011. [Exhibit B-139, B-153, B—157]

Prior to the PPT meeting, the Student’s physician submitted a letter about his
recommendations, as he was not able to attend the PPT meeting. This medical update
letter discussed the Student’s current medical status, noting that her abnormal movements
and spams had greatly decreased and that she had suffered a few episodes oflethargy and

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0} 17

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

severe weakness over the summer. Her physician noted that it was his goal to have the
Student attend a full school day, and recommended that cettain steps be taken to ensure
that the day goes as smoothly as possible including that the Student be provided extra
time to get from class to class; allow her access to sugar containing drinks or snacks if
she feels dizzy, shaky or weak; allow for a low protein diet for meals at school and allow
access to an elevator. [Exhibit B—154]

The PPT convened on September 6, 201 1 to review and revise the Student’s IEP. At the
PPT meeting, the team recommended that the Student return to the Board high school
with a full day program, that the Student receive a research based reading instruction, that
the school nurse design a health care plan, that door to door transportation be provided
and that the Student receive 3.5 hours of direct reading instruction, 7 hours of resource
suppon including pl‘eteaching, 3.5 hours of support in US. History 11, .5 hours per week
of social work support and 5 hours per month for each of the ACES provided services of
physical therapy, occupational therapy and assistive technology‘ The PPT was scheduled
to reconvene the week of October 3 to review progress and the consultation updates.
[Testimony Board Supervisor; Exhibit B-157]

The Student’s IEP goals included: (1) Demonstrate an improvement in word recognition
and decoding skills necessary to read for information and understanding; (2) Demonstrate
an improvement in comprehension skills necessary to read for information and
understanding; (3) Demonstrate an improvement in written language skills necessary to
write information, understanding and written expression; (4) Demonstrate an
improvement in mathematical concepts, reasoning and computation necessary to develop
problem solving skills and to utilize mathematics to address everyday problems; (5) [The
Student] will demonstrate an improvement in social skills; (6) Explore a variety of
careers and vocations in relation to her interest and skills; (7) Student will complete a
series of activities in order to prepare her to transition to competitive or supported
employment. [Exhibit B-157]

The Student’s school week included 22.5 hours per week with nondisabled peers, and 14
hours ofspecial education. [Exhibit B—157]

At the PPT meeting the Board speech language pathologist recommended an obsewation
in the classroom. This obsewation was not able to be completed subsequently as the
Student was not present at the school. [Testimony Board SLP]

During the PPT meeting, the Parent’s consultant Dr. Cherkes-Julkowski was provided a
signiﬁcant amount of time to go over her report. The Easton Country Day School director
was provided an opportunity to speak, but did not contribute during the meeting. Due to
his schedule conﬂicts, he had to depart from the PPT meeting prior to its conclusion
While there were many people at the PPT meeting, the Easton Country Day School
director testiﬁed that all people in the room were appropriate to contribute to the PPT.
[Testimony ECDS Director]

10

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44V

45.

At beginning of the September 6 PPT meeting, all attendees introduced themselves, and
the Parent had no objection to these attendees and did not seek to reschedule the PPT
meeting. [Testimony Board Supervisor]

At the PPT meeting the Student presented a PowerPoint for approximately 10 to 15
minutes. She was upset and emotional and didn’t ﬁnish her presentation, although she
was encouraged to do so. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Board Supervisor;
Exhibit B-158]

During the PPT meeting, the special education teacher presented the goals and objectives.
The Parent needed to leave the meeting, so the teacher wanted to ensure that they were
reviewed before the Parent departed from the meeting. She recommended that the
Student use the Read 180 program and Lexia Learning supplementary software, as well
as receive preteaching for content areas. Both Read 180 and Lexia are scientiﬁc
researched based interventions. The special education teacher recommended these
programs as they target the increase in reading goals and the basics of reading that were
discussed at the PPT meeting. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit B-157]

The Student’s IEP provided for appropriate modiﬁcations and accorrunodations,
including the AT recommended by the consultant. The Student’s health concerns were
also addressed at this meeting, as it was planned that the school nurse would develop a
health care plan for the Student. This consultation with the nurse never occurred as the
Student did not return to the school under this IEP. A PPT meeting was scheduled to
convene one month later to review the program in place to make sure the Student’s needs
were being met and to see if anything needed to be altered. [Testimony Special Education
Teacher]

The Parent did not object to the IEP at the meeting, and did not ask for placement at
Easton Country Day School. [Testimony Board Supervisor]

At this hearing, the Parent indicated that she disagreed with the Student’s program for the
2011—12 school year, not based on goals and objectives, but on over—arching issues of
safety and that the school has a nurse only one day per week. [Testimony Parent] The
Parent made no such objection to the IEP at the PPT meeting. [Testimony Board
Supewisor, Exhibit B-157] The Student’s physician did not include a necessity to have a
full time nurse as an accommodation for the Student in his list of steps required for the
Student to be in school ﬁlil time. [Exhibit B-154] Moreover, the Parent presented no
credible evidence to substantiate her claim that the Student was unsafe at the Board high
school.

Subsequent to the PPT meeting, on September 7 the Board’s attorney submitted a notice
to withdraw the pending Case No. 12-0009, The Board’s attorney noted that at the PPT
meeting additional medical information was provided by the Parent, which was reviewed,
and an IEP was developed for the Student. Therefore, at that time, the Board was not
requesting a full medical or psychiatric evaluation of the Student. In addition, the Board
withdrew its request as it appeared that the Parent’s request for an independent evaluation

11

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0117

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53,

did not meet the requirements of 34 C.F.R. Section 500.502(b) in that the Parent did not
disagree with the reading evaluation conducted by the Board. [Exhibit B-159]

Following the PPT meeting, the Student came into school on September 7. She was
provided the curriculum based assessments provided to all incoming students. Her math
assessment placed her at Algebra I or higher. Her Read 180 lexile placed her in the range
of a ninth grader. These beginning of the year assessments were substantially different
than the results obtained by the Parent’s consultant Dr. Cherkes—Julkowski, which had
concluded that the Student had trouble doing basic math and had other signiﬁcant
deﬁcits. The Student didn’t exhibit the alleged severe deﬁcits 0n the curriculum based
assessments. [Testimony Special Education Teacher] The Board evaluations,
assessments and experience with the Student are more accurate indicators of the
Student’s strengths and weaknesses, and are found to be more reliable than the results of
the Dr. Cherkes—Julkowski evaluation.

On September 1 l, the Parent sent an email notiﬁcation to the Board’s supervisor that the
Student would be out of school this week and continuing to Visit Easton. In this email the
Parent alleges that the Student is not safe in the public school system. [Exhibit B-160]

On September 21, the Board’s request for hearing, Case No. 12—0009, was dismissed by
the hearing ofﬁcer. [Exhibit B~165]

Through an email sent Sunday, September 25, the Parent requested this hearing. [Exhibit
B—l66]

Subsequent to the ﬁling of the request for hearing, in October and November 2011 the
Parent had a speech language pathologist, Meryl Aronin, assess the Student. [Exhibit P—
24] While the SLP concluded in his summaty that the Student presents with a written
and oral expression language disorder, he testiﬁed that the Student’s errors in speech
could be due to fatigue or other factors. [Testimony Private SLP]

The Student has never attended the school under the proposed IEP. [Testimony Parent]

The Board school psychologist compared the results of the Board’s psychoeducational
testing and the results from Dr. Cherkes—Julkowski’s educational evaluation. He
concluded that the Student knows the rules of decoding, and can effectively decode
words, particularly in light of her score on the pseudoword decoding subtest, l-Ie opined
that the Student might have abnormal visual scanning, which would need to be tested to
determine whether the discrepancy could be explained by a visual perceptual difﬁculty or
a visual scanning error. This testing, evaluations for Visual Perceptual Organization
(Koppitz II) and Visual scanning behavior (WISC—IV Cancellation and W] 111 Pair
Cancellation), was offered at a subsequent PPT in December 2011, but the Parent
declined the testing. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B—196]

The Board’s speech language pathologist recommended a speech language evaluation
(CELF 4) to assess Speech and Language and an audiological evaluation to assess at the

12

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

December 201 1 PPT, to which the Parent did not consent. [Testimony Board SLP,
Exhibit B—196]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Parent brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act [IDEA] Which provides for special education and related services to children with
disabilities, from birth through age 21. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive a
free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) with special education and related services
under the disability category Other Health Impaired pursuant to state and federal laws & Conn.
Gen. Stat. §§ 10-76 el. seq; the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 USC. §
1401, et seq.

The standard for determining whether a FAPE has been provided is set forth in Board of
Education oflhe Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982). The
two-pronged inquily set forth in Ro_wley asks first whether the procedural requirements of IDEA
have been reasonably met and, second, whether the IEP is “reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational benefits.” 15L at 206—207

The Parent’s claim that she was not allowed to participate in the September 6, 201 1 PPT
meeting is entirely without merit. The Parent and Student were allowed to speak at the meeting.
The Parent’s consultant presented her educational evaluation results for 30 to 45 minutes during
the meeting. The Parent was provided an opportunity for full participation in this meeting.
Nothing in the record supports the conclusion that there were any procedural violations which
resulted in a denial of FAPE to the Studenti

The second prong 0f Rowley is the determination ofwhether the Board offered the

Student an appropriate IEP. The proper gauge for determining the IEP is substantively

13

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

appropriate is the question of “whether the educational program provided for a child is
reasonably calculated to allow the child to receive ‘meaningful’ educational beneﬁts.” Mrs. B. V.
Milford Board of Education, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120 (2nd Cir. 1997). Meaningful educational
beneﬁts are “not everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents.” Tucker v. Bay
Shore Union Free School Dist, 873 RM 563, 567 (2nd Cir. 1989). Rather, school districts are
required to provide a “‘basie ﬂoor of opportunity” . l . [by providing] access to specialized
services which are individually designed to provide educational beneﬁt to the handicapped
child.” Mex, m, 458 US. at 201; geeglgg K.P. v. Juzwic, 891 F. Supp 703, 718 (D.Connt
1995) (the goal of the IDEA is to provide access to public education for disabled students, not to
maximize a disabled child’s potential)

The Board’s proposed IEP for the Student includes appropriate goals and objectives that
address the Student’s demonstrated weaknesses, including weaknesses in math and reading noted
on the psychoeducational evaluation, providing education utilizing scientiﬁcally research based
intewentions and appropriate related sewices in the area of AT, OT and PT, as well a health plan
to address any current medical issues that may arise or need to be addressed in the school setting.
The IEP provides all essential components necessary to enable the Student to obtain educational
beneﬁt in the Board school, and can follow all the steps suggested by the Student’s treating
physician for participation in a full school day. The Student’s physician recommended that the
Student could attend a full day of school, and did not suggest that the Student required a full time
nurse in order to attend school.

The proposed program is individualized and based on the Student’s assessments and
performance, and is provided in the least restrictive environment. The Board has appropriately

considered and concluded that the Student can be educated in the regular classroom, with the use

14

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12~01 17

of supplemental aids and services, and the proposed IEP has mainstreamed the Student to the
maximum extent appropriate. P. v. Newington Board of Education, 546 F. 3d 1 1 1 (2d Cir.
2008), citing Obelti v. Board of Educ., 995 F. 2d 1204 (3"! Cir 1993). Nothing in the record
suppoxts a conclusion that the Student requires a private placement to obtain educational beneﬁt.
The Board has demonstrated that the IEP for the 201 1~12 school year offers the Student at FAPE.

Because the IEP offers an appropriate program in the LRE, the Parent is not entitled to
reimbursement for any other placement, nor the cost of transportation and related services, as the
IDEA “does not require [a local educational agency] to pay for the cost of education, including
special education and related sewices, of a child with a disability at a private school or facility if
that agency made FAPE available to the child and the parents elected to place the child in a
private schoolﬂlci/iry.” 34 C.F.R. § 300.403(a) (emphasis added); §ee_a]so M.C. ex rel. Mrs. C.
v. Voluntown Bd. 01‘ Ed., 226 F. 3d 60, 66 (2d Cir. 2000)2

The Board has developed and offered an appropriate IEP for the Student for the 201 1-12
school year. Therefore, the Parents’ request for placement at Easton Country Day School and
the cost of transportation and related services must be denied.

The Parent is not entitled to reimbursement for the costs of her IEE conducted by Dr.
Miriam Cherkes—Julkowski and Meryl Aronin. A parent only has a right to an independent
educational evaluation at public expense if the parent disagrees with the evaluation obtained by
the public agency. 34 C.F.R. §300.502(b)( 1) The Parent did not articulate that she disagreed
with the Board’s psychoeducational evaluation, She seemed to be seeking a more in-depth

analysis of the assessments completed by the Board. The Board’s evaluation of the Student was

2 Only if it is concluded that the IEP is proceduratly or substantively deﬁcient must we reach the ﬁnal step
and ask whether the Parents‘ placement is appropriate to meet the needs ofthe Student. AC. and MC. v. Board of
Education ofChanpaqua Central School District, 553 F. 3d 165, 51 IDELR 147 (2"‘1 Cir. 2009)

15

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

appropriate, and the Parent is not entitled to reimbursement for the Dr, Cherkes—Julkowski
evaluation, Moreover, if the Parent is also seeking reimbursement for the Meryl Aronin speech
evaluation as part of her claimed reimbursement for the IEE, that request is denied. The Board
did not have an opportunity to have their own speech/language pathologist obsewe the Student in
the classroom as recommended by the September 6 PPT or conduct its own speech and language
evaluation of the Student.

The Student is not entitled to compensatory education, as the Board’s program for the
201 1—12 school year was appropriate and there were no procedural violations which resulted in a
denial ot‘FAPE.

The Board’s AT consultation completed by the ACES AT consultant was comprehensive
and appropriate. The Parent’s request for an AT re-evaluation is, therefore, denied.

While the issues included a request for an auditory processing evaluation, no evidence
was presented during the hearing regarding the alleged need for an auditory processing
evaluation, nor was there evidence that such an evaluation was requested at a PPT meeting.
Therefore, the request is denied as this issue has been abandoned by the Parent.

The hearing officer has authority to order evaluations as part of a hearing order. Regs.
Conn. Agencies §§10—76d—9(c)(4), 10-76h~13. The Board shall evaluate the Student in the
following areas to better understand the Student’s possible weaknesses.

The Parent shall fully cooperate in making the Student available for the evaluations, and
this hearing ofﬁcer order hereby overrides the lack of parental consent to these evaluations.

The placement of the Student at the Board high school shall not be delayed pending the

evaluations.

16

 

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-01 17

The evaluation reports shall identify any recommended changes or additions to the
Student’s goals and objectives to address any identiﬁed weaknesses, and the PPT shall convene
to implement any such recommended changes/additions to the Student’s IEP.

The Student shall be evaluated for Visual perception and Visual scanning behavior as
identiﬁed by the school psychologist, The evaluations for Visual Perceptual Organization
(Koppitz II) and Visual scanning behavior (WISC—IV Cancellation and WJ III Pair Cancellation),
and any additional 01‘ similar testing in the area of visual perception and Visual scanning, shall be
completed by the school psychologist or other evaluator selected by the Board who meets the
criteria required by the public agency, it‘any, in accordance with 34 CFR Section 300.502(e).

The Student shall also be evaluated through a speech language evaluation and an
audiological/hearing evaluation as recommended by the Board’s speech language pathologist.
This testing shall be completed by the Board speech language pathotogist and/or any other
evaluator selected by the Board who meets the criteria required by the public agency, if any, in

accordance with 34 CFR Section 300.502(e).

17

April 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—01 17

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
1. The Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 201 1— 12 school year is appropriate.

2‘ As the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2011—12 school year is
appropriate, the Parent is not entitled to reimbursement for the placement at the Student
at Easton Country Day School, and the Board is not responsible for the cost of
transportation to Easton Country Day School and the related sewices of a reading
specialist, OT and PT.

3. The Parent shall not be reimbursed for the IEE, including the Education Evaluation
completed by Di: Cherkes-Julkowski and the speech and language evaluation completed
by Meryl Aronin.

4. The Parent was provided a full opportunity to participate in the PPT meeting of
September 6 and therefore, the Board did not commit procedural violations relating to the
PPT meeting.

5, The Student is not entitled to an auditoxy processing evaluation.
6. The Student is not entitled to an assistive technology re—evaluation.
7. The Student is not entitled to compensatory education.

8‘ The Board shall conduct the additional evaluations/assessments as identiﬁed in this
decision. The lack oi‘parental consent to these evaluations is hereby overridden.

18

 

