August 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0455

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Westport Board ofEducation V. Student
Appearing on Behalf of the Parents: Parents, Pro Se
Appearing on Behalfof the Board: Marsha B. Moses, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460
Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

 

Was the psychological evaluation performed by the Board appropriate?

SUMMARY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Other Heatth Impaired and is entitled to receive a free
and appropriate public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C, §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10—76a. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rejected
the psychological evaluation performed by the Board.

The Parents requested the Board to pay for an independent psychological evaluation.
Their request was denied and the Board ﬁled a request for a due process hearing.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(CGS) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§l415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act, CGS
§§4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, and 4-181a and 4-186.

On J une 11, 2012, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. An
impattial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 11, 2012 and a pre-hearing conference
was held on June 26, 2012. At the pt'e—hearing conference the Parents had an advocate
present to assist them with the pre-hearing conference and the Parents advised the hearing
ofﬁcer that they were going to retain an attorney. The Parents would advise the hearing
ofﬁcer of the name of the attorney, The Parents did not advise the hearing ofﬁcer if they
retained an attorney. At the due process hearing the Parents represented themselves.

August 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0455

The matter proceeded to hearing on August 1, 2012. The Parents presented four exhibits.
Only Exhibit No. 1 was accepted as a full exhibit of the hearing. Exhibits No. 2 and 3
were found not to be relevant and Exhibit No. 4 was an incomplete report. The Board
presented twenty-two Board Exhibits for the hearing. The Board’s Exhibits were received
as full exhibits of the hearing.

The Parents expressed concern with the Student’s classiﬁcation and his progress. The
Parents were advised that the issue of the hearing was the appropriateness of the
psychological evaluation performed by the Board. No other issue had been raised at the
pre—hearing conference nor had any request to amend the due process hearing been ﬁled.

At the hearing, the Parents requested that the matter be continued in order to allow them
to retain an attorney. The request was denied. The Parents at the pre-hearing conference
had stated that they were going to retain an attorney and were advised to inform everyone
if they retained an attorney. As previously stated, the Parents appeared Pro Se. At the
commencement of the hearing the Parents did not state that they were in the process of
retaining an attorney or needed additional time to retain an attorney but proceeded with
the matter. At the time that the Parents requested additional time to retain an attorney, the
Board was in the process of examining their last witness and would have been prejudiced
as well as having to expend additional funds if the matter had been postponed.

The Parents did not present any witnesses in the hearing.

This Final Decision and Order set forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact
and conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set fmth herein,
which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other
supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this
matter. T0 the extent that the Summary and Proposed Findings of Fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer and vice versa,
SAS Institute, Inc. v. S&H Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F. Supp. 816 (M.D. Tenn.
1985); Bonnie Ann F. V. Callallen Ind. Sch. Bd., 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993). The
mailing date of the Final Order and Decision is August 24, 2012.

FINDINGS OF FACTS:

1. The Student is a student eligible to receive special education and related services
with a diagnosis of Other Health Impaired due to a seizure disorder. ( Board’s Exhibit '-
9)

2. At the March 31, 201 1 PPT meeting, the team recommended evaluations to
review the Student’s cognitive functioning and processing, memory, executive function,
social-emotional functioning, and to include an updated developmental hist01y,
classroom observations and functional assessments. These evaluations were to plan the
Student’s triennial evaluation. The Parents were in agreement with the evaluations.
(Testimony of Psychologist, B—2)

1 Hereafter Board’s Exhibits shall be noted as “B” followed by the exhibit number.

2

 

August 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0455

3. The psychologist staited the evaluation with classroom observations and a review
of the Student’s school record and prior psychological evaluations. The classroom
observations were performed in the large social studies class and also in a small group
language alts class. The evaluator conducted the Student’s “lunch bunch group.”
(Testimony of Psychologist, B4)

4. The psychologist performed various assessment procedures over seven testing
sessions which is more than normal due to the Student’s signiﬁcant lapses in attention.
(Testimony of Psychologist, B-4)

5. The evaluations were reviewed at the March 1, 2012 PPT. They reﬂected a
pattern Ofstrengths and weakness. As instructions became more abstract to the Student,
he would have more problems understanding which would impact his educational
progress. (B-4, Testimony of Psychologist)

6. The Student’s cognitive function was assessed through the administration of the
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children IV (WISC-IV) and the WISC IV Integrated,
Selected Subsets. Test performance suggested signiﬁcant variability, with a proﬁle of
relative strengths and continued and signiﬁcant weaknesses. To assess the Student’s
ability to engage in goal-directed, purposeful behaviors for efﬁcient task completion and
to regulate his cognitive, emotional and behavioral functioning, several subsets of the
Delis Kaplan Executive Function System (d-KEFS) and the Behavior Rating Scale of
Executive Function (BRIEF) were administered. (B-4)

7. The Student’s emotional, behavioral and adaptive functioning was assessed
through administration of the Behavioral Assessment System for Children (Second
Edition) (BASC—2). The Parents, Student and four of his teachers patticipated in this
assessment. Inconsistencies were noted in the responses of both parents’ and teachers’
rating, These inconsistencies in response may reﬂect the inconsistencies of the Student’s
behavior across settings. (B-4)

8. The Parents were dissatisﬁed with the evaluation and requested another PPTT On
June 1, 2012, the Board granted their request and conducted another PPT. The Board
provided the Parents with the district’s criteria for independent evaluation. (B-l3)

9. The psychologist investigated all areas of suspected disabilities and concerns of
the Student. The evaluator used legitimate accepted instmments for her assessments.
There is nothing further that can be attained from another psychological evaluation.
(Testimony of Psychologist)

10. The Parents were concerned with the change in classiﬁcation from Speech and
Language Impaired to Other Health Impaired. The Parents request for an independent
psychological evaluation was refused by the PPT. ( B-1 1, B-13)

August 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0455

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1. It is undisputed that the Student is entitled to receive special education and related
sewices to obtain FAPE under IDEA, 20 U.S.C. §1401 et. seq. FAPE is deﬁned as
special education and related sewices that are provided at public expense, meet the
standards of the state educational agency, include an appropriate school education, and
that are provided in conformity with the IEP. 20 U.S.C. §1401(8).

2. The Board brought this action in accordance with the IDEA which provides for
special education and related services to children with disabilities, from birth through age
21.

3. The Board ﬁled this request for hearing in accordance with the provisions of 34
CFR Section 300.502(b) which provides that if “a parent requests an independent
evaluation at public expense, the public agency must, without unnecessary delay . , . [ﬂile
a due process hearing to show that its evaluation is appropriate. . .” if the Parents’ request
is not granted. The sole issue to be determined is whether the Board’s psychological
evaluation is appropriate.

4. In determining the standard of appropriateness of an evaluation, the focus is on
whether the evaluation (1) used a variety of essential tools; (2) was administered by
trained, knowledgeable, and qualiﬁed personnel; (3) was administered and conducted
under standard conditions and in accordance with instructions provided by the producer
of the assessments; (4) incorporated various information sources such as classroom
observations and review of existing data; and (5) whether the independent information
would provide any new 01‘ additional information. Warren G. v. Cumberland County
School District, 190 F.3d 80, 87 (3ml Cir. 1999)

5. The psychological evaluation conducted by the Board’s psychologist complied
with all professional standards and was appropriate. The individual conducting the
psychological evaluation was well qualiﬁed, thoroughly trained, skilled and
knowledgeable, with appropriate credentials for completing the assessment. She is a
Nationally Certiﬁed School Psychologist who has published in the ﬁeld of executive
functioning and cognitive-behavioral interventions in the school setting.

6. The psychologist directly observed the Student and reviewed the data. She
reviewed the consultant’s report and concurred in her results. Thus, the level of
professionalism and quality of the assessment is appropriate.

7. The psychological evaluation used multiple tools and assessments, which further
leads to the conclusion that this assessment was appropriate. The evaluation consisted of
both indirect and direct assessment: data collection across multiple environments, direct
obsewations of the student, standardized questionnaires of staff and the student, review
of records, staff consultation and data analysis. This protocol was followed and set forth
in great detail in the comprehensive report. The psychological evaluation is clearly
appropriate in its use of nondiscriminatory assessments tools which included two

August 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0455

observations. There is no additional 01' better information that could be obtained from
another psychological evaluation.

8. To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parents is not speciﬁcally
addressed herein, the Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.
FINAL ORDER AND DECISION:

The psychological evaluation performed by the Board is an appropriate evaluation and
meets all the criteria of an appropriate evaluation as set fonh in the IDEA.

