October 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0502

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v, Meriden Board of Education

Appearing on Behalf of the Parent: Pro Se
Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hattford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing Before: Attorney Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Did the Board violate child ﬁnd in not identifying the Student as requiring special education
sewices as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA)?

SUMMARY and PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education
(FAPE) as deﬁned in IDEA 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et
seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent requested that the Student be
identiﬁed as requiring special education and related sewices as deﬁned in IDEA. The Board
refused the Parent’s request.

On June 19, 2012, the Board received notice of the Parent’s request for due process. The panics
agreed to go to a resolution meeting. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 19,
2012 and a pre—hearing conference was held on J une 26, 2012. A hearing date of August 2, 2012
was chosen by the parties.

In an electronic transmission, the Parent amended her request for due process. The Board held
their response to the amended complaint in abeyance because the parties agreed to mediate the
matter. A mediation date of August 24, 2012 was chosen by the parties. The parties were not able
to resolve the matter in mediation and a September 28, 2012 pre-hearing conference was
scheduled.

The Board ﬁled their objection to the Parent’s amended comp1aint. The Parent responded with a
request to amend her prior amended due process complaint and would continue amending until
the complaint was correct.

 

October 23, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0502

The sufﬁciency challenge ﬁled by the Board was found to have merit. The Parent’s continued
amendment of the due process complaint showed that the Parent was having difﬁculty framing a
request for due process for which relief could be granted. Therefore, the matter is dismissed
without prejudice.

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the
parties’ mediation and the hearing date. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is
November 1, 2012.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing officer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

!/ HearmgbijjéeTSiEnatme/

K V/

J ustino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

