May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

Si'ITAﬁ 6F @NNEfTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Danbury Board of Education

Appearing on Behalf ofthe Parents: Attorney Jennifer D. Laviano
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer D. Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecca R. Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing Before: Attorney Justine Rosado, Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUES:

1. Was the program provided by the Board for the 2010—20] 1 school year appropriate and
did it provide the Student with a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the
least restrictive environment (LRE)?

2, Is the program provided by the Board for the 20] 1-2012 school year appropriate and does
it provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE? If not;

3. Does Easton Country Day School provide the Student with FAPE in the LRB?

4. Should the Board pay for the placement of the Student at Easton Country Day School for
the 2011-2012 school year?

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

SUMMARY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Autistic and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act
(IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a Planning
and Placement Team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rejected the program offered by the Board for
the 2010-20] 1 school year. The Parents requested placement at Easton Country Day School for
the 201 12012 school year at the Board’s expense. The Board refused the Parents’ request.

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §10-
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

accorﬂance with the Uniform Administrative Frocedure Act, CGS §§4—176e to 44%, inclusive,
and 4-181a and 4-186.

On or about July 1, 201 1, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. The
parties agreed to go to mediation in place ofa resolution meeting.

An impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on July 13,2011 and a pre-hearing conference was
held on July 20, 2011. Hearing dates of September 15, 20 and 19, October 25, November 15,
17and 18, December 2, 5, 6, 9 and 12, 201 1 were chosen by the parties. The November 15, 17
and 18, 2011 hearing dates were cancelled. The Board submitted Exhibits 1 through Board’s
Exhibit 31. The Parents submitted Parents’ Exhibit 1 through Parents’ Exhibit 5. There were no
objections to the exhibits presented.

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the
parties’ mediation, hearing dates and post trial briefs. The date for mailing the F inal Decision
and Order is May 14, 2012.

This Final Decision and Order set forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference
certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other suppotted evidence in the
record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent that the
summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of law, they
should be so considered and Vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. v. S, & H. Computer Systems, Inc, 605
F.Supp. 816 (M.D.Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F. v. Callallen Independent School Board, 835
F.Supp. 340 (S.D.Tex. 1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is diagnosed with Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Not Otherwise Speciﬁed,
Attention Deﬁcit Disorder, General Anxiety Disorder, Developmental Coordination Disorder and
Disorder of Written Expression. He is classiﬁed as a student with Autism and is eligible to receive
special education and related services as defined in IDEA. (Testimony of Father, Board’s Exhibit1
No. 19).

2. The Student had attended the Board’s schools from kindergaiten until the end of his 6“1 grade
school year, 2010~2011. As the Student entered the 2010-201 1 school year at the intermediate
school, his social interactions became more troublesome. The Student demonstrated his anxiety by
ﬁdgeting and picking up objects from the ground. Other students would complain about it, and the
special education teacher believed it was distracting to the Student and would interfere with his
learning. (Testimony of Father, Testimony of Special Education Teacher)

' Hereafter Board’s Exhibits will be noted as “B” followed by the exhibit number, Parent’s Exhibits will be noted as
“P“ followed by the exhibit number and Hearing Ofﬁcer‘s Exhibits will be noted as “11.0.” followed by the exhibit
number.

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0046

Under Goa] No. 2, written expression, the Student mastered one objective and made satisfactory
progress in the other 2 objectives; overall the Student made satisfactory progress in Goa] No. 2.
(B2 pgs. 35-37)

4. The Student’s 5‘h grade Connecticut Mastery Test (CMT) showed that his overall scores were
at the Proﬁcient level in the Science test, the Reading test and the Writing test. In the Mathematics
test he scored better and was rated at the goal level. In comparison to the prior year’s CMT the
Student demonstrated growth in all 3 areas tested. (B—1)

5. The school psychologist conducted a psychological evaluation of the Student in preparation for
the May 1 1, 2010 PPT. The Student’s cognitive/intellectual potential was in the average to above
average range. Verbal skills were found to be a relative strength for the Student. His verbal
memory was average but weak. The Student demonstrated deﬁcits in visual motor integration; he
demonstrated an increase in anxiety as the novelty and difﬁculty of tasks increased. The Student
demonstrated difﬁculty with executive functions and weaker skills in working memory and
planning and organization. (B-2)

6. The special education teacher also conducted an educational evaluation in preparation for the
May 1 1, 2010 PPT. The Student was found to have a difﬁcult time initiating or maintaining eye
contact with peers and adults. He was found to be more outspoken in small groups. (B-2)

7. On May 11, 2010, the PPT met to discuss and plan the Student’s 2010-2011 school year and
review his current progress. The team agreed that in his 6'“ grade program the Student would
panicipate in a co-taught class for 7 1/2 hours, 1 ‘/2 hours of study skills with his special education
teacher and/or paraprofessional and 3/4 hours per week of social skills counseling. The Student
would be given an assistive technology evaluation. The PPT was of the opinion that the Student
did not require an extended school year. (B-2)

8. The PPT was concerned with the Student’s attention span, anxiety, ability to remain focused
and how his inferential comprehension was impacting his abilities in reading and written
expression. The team noted and addressed his writing deﬁciency in his goals and objectives. The
Parents expressed a need for strategies/intewentions to address the Student’s anxieties. The team
noted that these anxieties were impacting his socialization with peers especially in a large
classroom setting. Behavioral supports and interventions were included in the Student’s
Individualized Education Program (IEP). (B—2)

9. On October 21, 2010, the Board conducted an Assistive Technology Evaluation of the Student.
It was recommended that the Student be encouraged to use a word processor. Keyboard practice
was recommended in order for the Student to become more efﬁcient with this skill. It was also
recommended that the Student use large graph paper for math problems and use a slant board and
graphic organizers. (B—3).

10. The Student’s treating psychiatrist, Dr. J ohn Gelinas, stated that the Student has multiple areas
of developmental weaknesses and depressive disorders that have become more apparent in his
school year. The Student feels as if he does not belong and it is difﬁcult for him to interact with his

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

beers. The doctor has resoﬂed to pharmaceutical treatment to address his growing anxiety and
depression. (Testimony of Dr. John Gelinas)

11. Dr. Gelinas was of the opinion that the Student requires a smaller classroom setting in order to
be successful. He requires an environment where he “feels good about himself”. The Student
believes that he is being bullied. (Testimony of Dr. John Gelinas)

12. The Student’s transition into the middle school was not smooth. He was apprehensive; his
anxiety manifested itself by ﬁdgeting. The Parents requested a neuro-psychological evaluation at
the PPT meeting; the team agreed to the evaluation. The Father understood that the Student had
difﬁculty working with groups. The Student attains good grades; the issue is not his academic
progress but whether he can survive with peers in his educational setting without feeling
depressed. (Testimony of Father, B-4, B-8)

13. The PPT increased the amount of co-taught academics to 15 hours per week. The social skills
related services in the regular classroom were increased to 3.75 hours and .5 hours of social work
in the resource room was added. (B-4)

14. On or about November 18, 2010, the Father wrote a letter to the Board in regard to incidents
reported to him by his son that were resulting in severe anxiety. He complained of being teased,
bullied and on one occasion assaulted. The Parent requested immediate action by the Board. There
was no formal bullying complaint written by the Parent. The Student sees himself as a victim.
(Testimony of Father, P—5)

15. On or about February 10, 2011 the school counselor informed the assistant principal that the
Student had had a disagreement with another student. The other student had called the Student a
“dinosaur” and the Student had interpreted this to mean he was fat. The counselor had the students
agree that they would seek him out if they had any further disagreements. The counselor did not
have to intervene between these two students again. The counselor was not aware of the Student
being bullied. The Student demonstrated positive interactions with other students. (Testimony of
School Counselor, B-6)

16. The Assistant Principal investigated the Parents’ reported harassment of the Student by another
student. The other student was questioned about the reported incident and could not come up with
anything concrete about the incident. The special education teacher had reported that the only
incident she noticed was a student telling the Student to shut up because he was making too much
noise. The students’ seats were changed so they would not be sitting near each other. (B—7,
Testimony of Assistant Principal)

17. On 01' about February 24, 201 l, the Student reported to the Assistant Principal that another
student was calling him inappropriate names. The other student had been calling him by his given
name rather than the name he likes to be called. The Student admitted to saying unkind words
back. The other student had apologized and agreed not to call him by his given name again. The
students shook hands and agreed to be supportive of each other. There was no bullying report ﬁled.
(B-1 0, Testimony of Assistant Principal)

 

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0046

1g. 5n 01' about March 1W1 1, a stuHenTsaid “excuse mej and pushed lﬁs way into the lockers.
The Student complained to the Assistant Principal who called in the student. The student
apologized for his mdeness and the students shook hands. The Student was satisﬁed with the
intervention. (Bel , Testimony of Assistant Principal)

19. On 01' about March 10, 2011, the Student had a Neuropsychological evaluation performed by
Dr. Arielle Albert as agreed to by the Parents and the Board. The purpose of the evaluation was to
assess the Student’s neuropsychological proﬁle and to assist with his educational program. Based
on Dr. Albert’s evaluation, the PPT changed the Student’s classiﬁcation from Other Health
Impaired t0 Autism, Pewasive Developmental Disorder (PDD). (B—12, B—19)

20. Dr. Albeit found that the Student’s math and reading comprehension skills are in the average
range. His greatest weakness was in written language skills. The Student’s evaluation showed that
he was below average in his reading ﬂuency skills, spelling skills, punctuation, st01y composition
and sentence structure. His performance in written language was consistent with a Disorder of
Written Language. The Student’s weakness in areas of executive functioning contributes to his
writing difﬁculties. (B-12)

21. The evaluator found that the Student demonstrated above average performance in his
sequential ability, visual perceptive skills, verbal ﬂuency, verbal memory and visual performance
skills. He demonstrated weakness in motor planning, motor sequencing and Visual motor
integration. (B-12)

22. The Student’s difﬁculties in the social arena contribute to his anxiety and depressive
symptoms. The Student has difﬁculty with reciprocal conversation with his peers. He wants to
speak about his interests and has difﬁculties changing topics to include his peers’ interest. The
Student demonstrates considerable social difﬁculties, social misperceptions and over focused
interest. Dr. Albert found him to be a child who “desperately wants to connect with other
children. . . [but] has difﬁculty knowing how to converse with others in an age appropriate manner
causes him to feel “worthless,” “invisible,” and hopeless about the future.” The Student’s Father
was given the Social Responsive Survey questionnaire which measured the severity ofsoeial
difﬁcu1ties. The Father’s responses placed the Student in the “severe” range in terms of the degree
of social difﬁculty he experiences in everyday social interactions. (B-12)

23. Dr. Albert made 26 recommendations to assist the palties with the Student’s proﬁle and plan
his educational program. Among the recommendations are:

a. A combination of mainstream classes and special education support to help with
his learning, behavior and social functioning;
A high degree of structure and predictability in his school day;
Consultation with expens in PDD;
Oppottunities that can enable him to receive positive attention about his behavior;
The student should continue to receive speciﬁc therapeutic intervention to
improve his social skills and social communication;
Oppoﬂunities for informal social interactions;
Participating in structured extracun‘icular activities;

9999‘

(70?”

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0046

h. Conﬁnued modiﬁcations to school environment to address his attentional
difﬁculties;

i. Learning tools and strategies through counseling and psychotherapy to help him
manage frustrations and stress;

1. Pre-teaching and priming to maximize his school performance and anxiety;

k. Organizational supports and help with prioritizing work and planning his
approach to multi-step tasks.

(B-12)

24. A speech and language evaluation was performed as recommended by the January 13, 2011
PPT. The evaluator recommended summer services to address the Student’s social and
communicative issues. The pathologist found the Student at risk for mood and self—esteem
problems and for negative interactions with peers. She recommended the involvement of a speech
pathologist for suppott for his communication, social thinking/problem solving and his dysﬂuency.
Increased perspective-taking could develop the Student’s awareness to the concept that others may
have different ideas about the same thing. She recommended increasing non-verbal
communication skills using Video models and role playing and that the Student receive summer
sewices to address his social and communication issues. (B-14)

25. During the 2010-201 1 school year, the student maintained A and B grades in his academic
courses. The special education teacher worked on the Student’s social deﬁcits and co-taught the
student. In the resource room she worked on the Student’s skills, provided pre-teaching and
prepared him for tests and quizzes. The Student used an Alpha Smart device because his
handwriting was difﬁcult to read and it was an issue for the Student. (B—13, Testimony of Special
Education Teacher)

26. At the May 31, 201 1 PPT, the team reviewed the evaluations performed and planned the
Student’s 2011-2012 school year program. An occupational therapy evaluation was also reviewed
by the PPT and occupational therapy sewices were recommended in order to address handwriting
and sensory issues. Many of the recommendations of Dr. Albeit were included in the Student’s
IEP. The student’s teachers and staff members reported that he was doing well academically and
making progress in social skills. Speech and language services were added to the Student’s IEP.
(B-19, Testimony OfSpecial Education Teacher)

27. The Student did not master any of his goals for the 2010-201 1 school year. He mastered 2
objectives in his reading comprehension goal and made satisfactory progress in this goal. In Goal
No.2, his written expression goal, he made satisfactory progress and did not master any objectives.
In Goal N0. 4, social/behavior, the Student mastered 2 objectives and overall made satisfactory
progress. (B-19 pgs. 27-30)

28. For the 2011—12 school year, the PPT recommended speech language services for .75 hours per
week, individual counseling for .75 hours per week, social skills lunch group for 2.5 hours per
week, social skills group for .75 hours per week, OT for .75 hours per week and study skills for
2.25 hours per week. The increase in school counseling reﬂected what actually had been provided
to the Student during the 2010-2011 school year and was not an actual increase of services. (B-19,
Testimony of School Counselor).

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0046

29. Physical Education was a source of anxiety for the Student throughout the 2010—201 1 school
year. The space was large and loud and “there were problems throughout the year” in gym with
him and his relationships with peers. At the May 31, 201 1 PPT, the district recommended
removing the Student from gym. (B-19, Testimony of Special Education Teacher)

30. At the May 31, 2011PPT, the Parents requested an out of district placement to Easton Countly
Day School. The request was denied. (Testimony of Father)

3]. The Student palticipated in uniﬁed theatre. It was difﬁcult for the Student to take the other
students ideas into consideration. The Student participated in a lunch group and communicated
with the other students. This was done to refocus and provide a break for the Student. He received
social skills instruction during this period. There were approximately 8 students in this group. The
teacher felt that there was progress during these sessions and the Student gave compliments and
did not monopolize the conversation. (Testimony of Social Skills Counselor)

32. In early June 201 1, an incident occurred in the gym which upset the Student to the point where
he made a suicidal gesture at home that night. The students were in bus line just before dismissal.
The incident occurred about something the Student purchased for his mother. The Student was
pushed to the ground and he made some threats to the other student. The Physical Education
Teacher separated the students and wrote an incident report. There were no witnesses to the actual
incident. The Student went home and that evening, took a large calving knife out of the kitchen
knife block, and held it up in the air as if he wanted to kill himself. The Father was able to get the
knife away from him and calm him down. The Parents called the Student’s therapist who advised
him not to take him to the hospital. The Parents did not call 91 1. (Testimony of Father, Physical
Education Teacher, B—21, B—29)

33. The reported progress of the Student’s social behavior for the 15‘ rating period of the 201 1-
2012 IEP was satisfactory. (B—22)

34. The Student was given a shadow during transitions in the school building because of the
unstructured environment. This was done because of the Parents” concern for the Student’s safety.
The Student’s paraprofessional did not report any concerns. The Student ﬁnished the school year
well and never stated to anyone in school that he wanted to hurt himself. (Testimony of Special
Education Supervisor, Testimony of Special Education Teacher)

35. On or about June 5, 2011, the Parents’ attorney e-mailed a report from Dr: Gelinas, the
Student’s treating psychiatrist, to the Board for their review. Upon receiving Dr, Gelinas’ repelt,
the Board requested consent to conduct a psychiatric evaluation; the Parents provided consent for
the evaluation. (B-20, B—23, Testimony OfSpeciai Education Supervisor)

36. Dr. Gelina’s Psychiatric Memorandum placed the Student at risk of escalating depression and
anxiety, in the context of his neurological deﬁcits, academic and learning weaknesses, and
interpersonal struggles with his peers in school. The doctor recommended that the Student be
placed in a small, structured, out of district learning environment where he would be at

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

 

substantially less risk oi sutterlng eveﬁ greater anxTety and depressibn.Tie §tudent needs an
environment where he will be comfortable. (B—20, Testimony of Dr. John Gelinas)

37. In September 201 l, the Parents unilaterally placed the Student in Easton Countiy Day School
(ECDS). ECDS em'oils students from infant through age 18. There are only 200 students in the
entire school. There are Pi'e—School and High School programs, but the Student is in the K-8
Program which has 1 10 students em'olled. Of those, approximately 12 have IEPS. The Student’s
classes at ECDS are small, with 15 students as a maximum. Often there is more than one adult in
the class as well. The Student does not complain about bullying in ECDS and is learning how to
problem—soive and interact appropriately with peers. The Student does not have a paraprofessional
or a shadow at ECDS. (Testimony of Director of ECDS)

38. The Student is learning how to problem-solve and interact appropriately with peers. The
Student no longer reports incidents of bullying. (T estimony of Director of ECDS, Testimony of
Father)

39. In September 201 1, Dr. Joel Wolfson, at the request of the Board, conducted a Psychiatric
Evaluation of the Student. In order for the Student to be successful in his school program. The
Doctor made the following recommendations:
a. A classroom aide to assist the Student in transitions and unstructured times;
b. Intense social skills programming to help facilitate successful per interactions;
c. Speech and language therapy should be in a group session to encourage positive
peer connnunications;
d. OT services to address ﬁne motor and graphic motor weaknesses as well as
sensory integration/sensmy processing difﬁculties;
e. Identify a quiet place where the Student can go to feel more grounded and calmer,
as well as person or persons he can go to for suppmt;
f. A school based counselor to help him discuss and process his perception of
others.
(B-24)

40. In his interview with Dr. Wolfson, the Student did not want to return to the Board’s school
because he was being bullied. The Doctor did not feel the Student had suicidal ideations but
wanted to be accepted. The Doctor saw that the Student was doing well academically with
interventions in place but had trouble with transitions. The Doctor was of the opinion that the
Student’s concerns can be addressed by having intensive interventions, and a program with social
skills training with role play social situations. Social Skills strategies should be integrated in the
Student’s program. The Doctor found that the Student’s judgment was impaired as is his ability to
modulate and seif—regulate his emotions. He felt that the plan that had been formulated by the PPT
in his IEP had not been given sufﬁcient time to see if they were effective. The Doctor was not
convinced the Student had been bullied 01‘ was having a misperception because of his perception
that he was being bullied. (Testimony of Dr. Joel Wolfson, B-24))

41. On October 6, 2011, the PPT met to discuss Dr. Wolfson’s psychiatric report and review the
independent evaluation of DR. Geiinas. The IEP of May 31, 2011 was to be continued as the

 

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0046

§tudent’s program Er the 701 1-W12 school year with the addition ofa 1—1 tutor to assist with
transitions and unstructured time. (B~25)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1. It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services as set forth
in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1401, et seq.

2. The most comprehensive test for determining whether any violation of the IDEA has occurred
is set forth by the Supreme Court in Board ofEducation v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176, 102 S. Ct. 3034
(1982). In Rowley, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded an order requiring the school to
provide a deaf student with a sign-language interpreter in all Of her classes. The Supreme Court
held that the IDEA‘s requirement of a "free appropriate public education“ is satisﬁed when the
state provides personalized instruction with sufﬁcient support services to permit the handicapped
child to beneﬁt educationally from the instruction. Rowley, 458 U.S. at 201, 102 S. Ct. at 3048.
The child must receive "some educational beneﬁt“ from the education provided; the best possible
education is not required. Id.

3. The IDEA imposes strict procedural requirements on educators to ensure that a student‘s
substantive right to a "free appropriate public education" is met. 20 U.S.C. § 1415. These
procedural requirements allow for palticipation of the parents or guardian throughout the
development of the IEPs, together with due process procedures to challenge questionable
placements or decisions. Under Rowley, when challenges to a student‘s individualized education
program are made, the Court undertakes a two-part inquily, determining: (1) whether the
procedural mandates of the act were followed and (2) whether the student received individualized
educational sewices designed to provide some educational beneﬁt. Rawley, 458 U.S. at 206, 102 S.
Ct. at 3051. The Parents have presented no evidence of any procedural Violations of IDEA. There
has been persuasive evidence that the Parents have been very active paiticipants of the Student’s
PPT who were listened to by members of the team. Notice requirements were clearly adhered to
and the Parents did not allege or present evidence that they were not properly and timely provided
with the Student’s educational records when they were requested.

4. IDEA requires the relevant public education authority to prepare and review at least annually an
”individualized education program” (IEP) for each child with a disability. 20 U.S. §1414(d)(4);

34 C.F.R. §300.324. The IEP is the primary vehicle for ensuring that a disabled child‘s educational
program is individually tailored to meet the child‘s unique abilities and needs. See U.S.C.
§l414(d); 34 C.F.R. §§300.320-300.324. A child's IEP describes, among other elements, the
child‘s present levels of educational performance, measurable annual goals for addressing the
child‘s educational needs that result from the child's disability and the individualized instruction
and services that will be provided to help the child. 20 U.S.C. §1414(d)(1)(A); 34 C.F.R.
§300.320.

5. Additionally, the IEP must include a statement of the individualized instruction and services
(including supplementary aids and services and program supports and modiﬁcations for school

 

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

personnel) that will alTow the clﬁfd to makTe appropriate progress towara attaining the amiual goals
of the IEP, "to be involved and progress in the general curriculum" and ”to participate in
extracurricular and other nonacademic activities", and "to be educated and participate with other
children with disabilities and nondisabled children“ in those extracurricular and other nonacademic
activities. 20 U.S.C. §1414(d)(1)(A)(IV)(bb); 34 C.F.R, §300.320(a)(3) The Student is receiving
good grades as stated by the Parents. (Findings of Fact No. 12) The issue is whether he is being
provided with sufﬁcient independent educational support services to permit him to receive
educational beneﬁt from his instruction as IDEA mandates and the second prong of Rowley
requires. Progressing from grade to grade and receiving passing grade is not the only indicator or
requirement to show that a student is receiving FAPE. The Student’s 2009—2010 school year
seemed to be a successful year but as the Parent and the record shows, his 2010-2011 school year
was not as successful. Although he was receiving passing grades (Findings of Fact No. 12), his
IEP progress reports do not show a student receiving grades of A and B or a student making
progress on his IEP goals and objectives. (Findings of Fact Nos. 2, 22, 27, 29 and 34) The
Student’s social skills are vital components of a meaningful education. The testimony clearly
shows the Student’s school environment deteriorating and progressing to suicidal ideation gestures
and requiring that he be provided with a shadow to ensure his safety. The Student should have
been provided with an extended school year to avoid any regression and assist with his transition
to the middle school. (Findings of Fact No. 24) This is not an environment where the Student can
receive educational beneﬁt from his instruction as IDEA mandates. The 2010—201 1 school year
was not appropriate and did not provide the Student with FAPE.

6. The Parents claim that the Student has been bullied in the Board’s school and that the Board has
not prevented this from occurring. The bullying of a student with disabilities can lead to a
deprivation of FAPE. T.K. and SK. 011 BehalfofL. K. v. New York City Department ofEducalion,
779 F.Supp. 2d 289 (201 l) The Court found that “It is not necessaly to show that the bullying
prevented all oppmtunity for an appropriate education, but only that it is likely to affect the
opportunity of the student for an appropriate education.” Further, “when responding to bullying
incidents, which may affect the oppmtunities of a special education student to obtain an appropriate
education, a school must take prompt and appropriate action. It must investigate if the harassment is
reponed to have occun‘ed. If harassment is found to have occurred, the school must take appropriate
steps to prevent it in the future. These duties of a school exist even if the misconduct is covered by its
anti—bullying policy, and regardless of whether the student has complained, asked the school to take
action, 01‘ identiﬁed the harassment as a fotm of discrimination.”

7. In Connecticut at the time of the 2010-2011 school year, “bullying” was deﬁned as: “any overt
acts by a student or a group of students directed against another student with the intent to ridicule,
harass, humiliate or intimidate the other student while on school grounds, at a school-sponsored
activity or on a school bus, which acts are committed more than once against any student during
the school year. CGS §10-222d. The United States Department of Education has made it clear that
harassment and bullying of children with disabilities is unacceptable, On July 25, 2000, the USDE
Ofﬁce for Civil Rights (OCR) and Ofﬁce ofSpecial Education and Rehabilitative Sewices
(OSERS) sent a “reminder” to educational professionals as to their “responsibilities” under Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title 11 of the ADA. That reminder included the
following language on “prohibited disability harassment”: “Disability harassment can have a
profound impact on students, raise safety concerns, and erode efforts to ensure that students with

10

 

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

 

 

disablhties have equal access to the myriad beneﬁts that an education ofifers. Indeed, harassment
can seriously interfere with the ability of students with disabilities to receive the education critical
to their advancement ...Disabi]ity harassment is preventable and cannot be tolerated. Schools,
colleges, and universities should address the issue of disability harassment not just when, but
before incidents occur.”

8. I agree that bullying cannot and should not be tolerated in any environment especially in any
school environment. As the OSEP “reminder” states, “Disability harassment is preventable and
cannot be tolerated.” The Student on various occasions has stated that he has been bullied.
Testimony and exhibits present approximately six occasions where the Student perceived he was
being bullied. (F indings of Fact Nos. 14-18 & 32). In reviewing the record and the testimony as to
these incidents, the actions were 2 of the 3 forms that bullying can take: physical and taunting. The
third form of bullying, indirect, psychological bullying in the form of exclusion and isolation, Q
at 298, were not perceived or presented during the course of the hearing. The Student is in
mainstream programming; he has a lunch bunch to assist him with socialization, was part of
uniﬁed theatre and went on excursions with his peers. As to the other forms of bullying, there was
no evidence presented that the Student’s perception of bullying was that it was done continuously
by the same student or students; his perceptions were that it seemed to have occun‘ed with different
students, either male 01‘ female. One of the incidents of the physical bullying occurred when the
Student accused a student of taking something that belonged to him, the Student was pushed down
by the other student and the Student threatened to hit the other student. Neither the record nor the
testimony clearly showed that what the Student accused the other student of taking was in the other
student’s possession. The verbal taunting was a misinterpretation of the word “dinosaur” and
another was the calling of the Student by his given name. These incidents do not clearly show that
the other students’ acts were in fact incidents of bullying but the Student’s perception that he was
being bullied and, as stated by his father, “he does not seem to have the tools to suppress the
emotions or compensate for the situation,” (B-9), D12 Gelinas, “the Student believes he is being
bullied,” (Findings ofFaet No. 10) and Dr. Albeit, “of the [Student’s] difﬁculty in connecting with
others causes him to feel “worthless.” (Findings of Fact No. 20). The actions of the other students
were not acts of bullying as perceived by the Student and deﬁned in CGS §10—222d, Sugra.

9, The Board requires all sixth graders to take a course called developmental guidance, in which
the students are “taught about bullying, empathy, how to treat others, how to report bullying and
what is bullying.” To that end, under IDEA the question to be asked is whether school personnel
was deliberately indifferent to, or failed to take reasonable steps to prevent bullying that
substantially restricted a child with learning disabilities in his or her educational oppoﬁunities. The
Board in all situations of the Student’s perception of bullying acted promptly to curb and rectify
the situation. (Findings of Fact # 14-18 & 32)

10. The program offered for the 2011—2012 school year was not reasonable calculated to provide
the Student with educational beneﬁts. The Student should have been provided with an extended
school year to avoid any regression and as the speech and language pathologist recommended to
address the Student’s social and communicative issues. (Findings of Fact # 24) Since the changes
made to the Student’s IEP on January 31, 201 1, there were 5 incidents involving the Student with
another student, an incident at home with a knife and the placing of a 1 to 1 tutor to ensure the
Student’s safety. The October 6, 201 l IEP, adds a ltol tutor to help with transitions and

11

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0046

unstructured times. ﬁle ﬁoctor also recommended intensive interventions (Tindings offact N0.
39). The adding of .75 hours of individual counseling with the school psychologist is not an
intensive intewentiont The Student needs intensive interventions as Dr. Wolfson recommended
(Findings of Fact No. 39) and consultation with an expert in PDD as Dr. Albert recommended.
(Emphasis added) (Findings of Fact No. 23) The Board should have invited a Board Ce1tiﬁed
Behavioral Analyst to consult on the Student’s behavior to create a Behavioral Intervention Plan
(BIP) to address the Student’s issues rather than just have a tutor acting as a police ofﬁcer to insure
his safety and help with transitions and unstructured times. The 1101 tutor is only a “band aid” and
doesn’t address the actual problem of the Student feeling “worthless” and a “Victim” in his
educational environment. There was no consideration or thought given in his IEP to help the
Student become independent of the shadow.

1 1. The Parents are seeking reimbursement for their unilateral placement to ECDS. In Stephen G,
v. Arlington Central School District, 418 F. Supp. 2d 559, the court found that, a Board of
Education may be required to pay for educational sewices obtained for a student by his or her
parent, if (i) the sewices offered by the board of education were inadequate or inappropriate, (ii)
the services selected by the parent were appropriate, and (iii) equitable considerations support the
parents' claim. See MS. v. Bd. ofEduc. of the City Sch. Dist. of Yonkers, 231 F. 3d 96, 102, 104
(2d Cir. 2000), cert denied, 532 US. 942 (2001); see also Walczak, 142 F.3d at 129 (citing
Burlington Sch. Comm. v. Dept. afEduc., 471 U.S. 359 (1985)), These three factors will be
referred to as the "Burlington factors." The Board’s program has been found not to provide the
Student with FAPE, therefore the ﬁrst factor has been satisﬁed. The Parents provided sufﬁcient
evidence to show that the program at ECDS was providing the Student with educational beneﬁt.
The Student social and victimization issues were being addressed properly and the Student was in
an environment that did not require the use of a shadow and the elimination of gym. The program
at ECDS is appropriate.

12. Hearing ofﬁcers have the authority to provide compensatory education as an equitable remedy
for denial of FAPE. Since the United State Supreme Coult decision of Burlington School Comm. v.
Mass, Dept 0fEduc., 1984-85 EHLR 556:389, courts have consistently held that compensatmy
education is an appropriate remedy under IDEA. See, e.g., MC, v. Central Regional School
Dist, 81 F.3d 389 (3rd Cir. 1996); Pihl v. Massachusetts Department ofEducmion, 9 F.3d 184 (lst
Cir. 1993) Futther, according to the Ofﬁce of Special Education Programs, United States
Department of Education, IDEA grants due process hearing officers the authority to award
compensatory education. Inquiry ofKohn, 17 EHLR 522 (OSEP 2/13/91) Compensato1y
education is limited to egregious denials of FAPE or egregious procedural violations. The Student
in this matter was denied FAPE in the 2010-20] 1 and 201 1~2012 school years. As to the 3rd prong
of Burlington, ECDS appears to have been a solution arrived at by the Parents once they decided
that the district was not proposing any viable alternative for their son. Therefore, the
reimbursement of the Student’s placement at ECDS shall be the equitable remedy for the Student,
placing him in the same position as if the Board had provided the Student with FAPE. The Board
shall reimburse the Parents for their out of pocket expenses for the 2011—2012 school year.

13. To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parents is not speciﬁcally addressed herein, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

12

 

May 9, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0046

COMMENT: The Student should hot become an “out of district statistic,” but is capable of
returning to his neighborhood school and continue his education with his peers. I did not address
this in my order because of the lengthy hearing, the school year which was the issue of this
hearing has weeks to ﬁnish and a PPT should be being planned to address the Student’s 2012-
2013 school year. That school year is not within my jurisdiction to address. The Student can
make educational progress in the Board’s school if provided with an appropriate program and the
necessary related sewices.

The parties were well represented by their respective attorneys and eveiyone conducted
themselves very well.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The program offered by the Board for the 2010—201 1 school year is not appropriate and did
not provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE.

2. The program offered by the Board for the 2011—2012 school year is not appropriate and will
not provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE.

3. The unilateral placement of the Student at ECDS was appropriate and provided the Student
with FAPE in the LRE.

4. Since the program offered by the Board for the 2011-2012 school year was not appropriate
and ECDS is appropriate, the Board must reimburse the Parents for their out of pocket
expenses for the unilateral placement of the Student at ECDS for the 201 1-2012 school year,
including, but not limited to, tuition, transpoﬁation and books.

13

