June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Parents, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Andreana Bellach, Esq.
Christopher Tracey, Esq.
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

300 Atlantic Avenue
Stamford, CT 06901—3522

Appearing before: Mary H .B. Gelfman, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board provide a free appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least
restrictive environment to the Student in the 2009—2010 school year?

2. If not, what shall be the remedy?

3. Did the Board provide FAPE in the least restrictive environment to the Student in the
2010-201 1 school year?

4, If not, what shall be the remedy?

5. Has the Student’s Individualized Education Program (IEP) been changed outside the
Planning and Placement Team (PPT) process?

6. Has the Student been re—evaluated in a timely fashion pursuant to 34 CPR. §
300.303?

7. Ancillary claim under Section 504: have the Board 01‘ individual school staff members
diseriminated or retaliated against the Parents and/or the Student?

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

that a Board employee, scheduled to appear as a witness the next day, had a family
emergency and would not be able to appear. The March 20 hearing session was
postponed, and the Hearing Ofﬁcer scheduled hearing sessions for April 9 and 26. On
March 27, the Hearing Ofﬁcer scheduled hearing sessions for May 7 and 15, and at the
request of the Board extended the decision date from April 27 to May 25. Subsequently,
the hearing date of May 22, 2012 was also added and the decision date was extended at
the request of the Parties to June 25, 2012.

The hearing convened on November 29 and December 1, 2011; January 1 1 and 17;
February 13, 27 and 28; March 12; April 26; and May 7, 15 and 22, 2012.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

SUMMARY:

The Student’s special education services for Autism had been provided by contracted
service providers with a contracted supervisor. When the Board decided to Change from
contracted providers to qualiﬁed Board employees, Parents objected. Eventually a
transition plan was developed between the Parties. Parents believe that the Board has not
complied with the transition plan, and that Student’s IEP was not properly implemented
during school years 2009—2010 and 2010-2011. Parents also allege that Student’s IEP has
been changed outside the PPT process and that Student has not been evaluated in a timely
fashion. They have also made an ancillary claim that Student and his family have been
discriminated against and/or retaliated against by Board staff members.

In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 U,S.C. § 1232g and related regulations at 34 C.F.R. §
99, the following decision uses “Student”, “School”, “Parent” and titles of school staff
members and other witnesses in place of names and other personally identiﬁable

information.

This Final Decision and Order sets faith the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact
and conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law set fOIth herein,
which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other
supported evidence on the record. To the extent that the procedural history, summary,
and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered,
and vice versa. For reference, see SAS Institute Inc. v. H. Computer Systems, Inc, 605
F.Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F v. Calallen Independent School
District, 835 F.Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993).

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence
and testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts.

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

1,

The Student was born on August 20, 2000, and is now eleven years of age and
completing his ﬁfth grade year. His diagnosis of Autism was made when he was very
young. The repmt of a psychological evaluation by Independent Psychologist C
dated June 26, 2003, from the Center for Children with Special Needs, LiL,C.,
conﬁrmed the diagnosis and made educational recommendations. Student entered the
Board’s pre—school program later that year. (Ex. P-1, P-3)

The PPT convened on November 3, 2006, with both Parents, the Board’s Special
Services Director, Regular and Special Education Teachers, Board Speech/Language
(S/L) Pathologist, Board Occupational Therapist (OT), Contracted Behavior Analyst
A, Contracted ABA Shadow A and Contracted ABA Supervisor A in attendance,
Among the PPT recommendations from this meeting were:
0 Team meetings ~ 1 hr/month with contracted ABA [Applied Behavior Analysis]
Consultant
0 Plan for transitioning Behavior Consultant and ABA Shadow to [Board] Behavior
Analyst and [Board] staff will be developed and attached to the 1 1/3/2006 IEP,
The plan will be developed by the Team, reviewed and revised on an ongoing
basis through team meetings and communication between staff.
The terms “Team Meeting” and “Clinic Meeting” refer to meetings of Board
employees and Contractors to the Board providing services to Student, and Parent. It
should not be constmed as the PPT, Eventually there were two team meetings a
month: one to discuss Student’s program and one to discuss progress on the transition
plan, Notes from some of these meetings were entered on the record of the hearing.
(Ex. P—21; P-94; P-145; P—184; Testimony, Mother, Tr. 1/17/2012, Tr, 2/13/2012)

Subsequent PPT meetings were held on March 7, May 30, June 13, September 20,
October 18 and December 5, 2007; May 13, October 29 and November 7, 2008.
(Ex. P-29; P-33; P—35; P-4l; P-42; P—45; P—49; P-61)

Prior to the evaluations discussed at the June 17, 2009, PPT meeting (below), the
following evaluation repoﬁs were entered on the record of this hearing. Each
evaluation repoxt is identiﬁed as provided by (Board) or by (Parent):
3/23/2003 Speech/Language (S/L) evaluation (Parent) (Ex. P—2)
6/26/2003 Psychological evaluation (Parent) (Ex. P—3)
4/22/2004 Occupational Therapy (OT) evaluation (Board) (Ex. P-8)
5/2005 S/L evaluation (Board) (Ex. B-l)
7/11/2005 Psychological evaluation (Parent) (Ex. B—l)
12/28/2005 S/L evaluation (Parent) (Ex. P~16, B—l)
4/18/2006 OT evaluation (Board) (Ex. B—l)
5/30/2006 Psychosocial/Behavioral Evaluation (Board) B—l)
11/2007 OT evaluation (Board) (P-44; B-l)
3/1 1/2009 Psychological evaluation (Parents) (Ex. B-18; P-80)
6/8/2009 S/L evaluation (Parents) (Ex. B-l4; P-80)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This hearing was requested by Parents on August 17, 201 1. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was
appointed on the same day, The date for mailing the decision was October 31, 2011.
The Hearing Ofﬁcer offered September 8, 16, and 22 for a pre—hearing conference,
without success.

The Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss and to Sequester on August 26, 2011, and Parents
responded on September 2, 2011. The Hearing Ofﬁcer responded on September 8,2011,
dismissing some of the Parents’ issues as not within the scope of authority of a Special
Education Hearing Ofﬁcer.

A pre-hearing conference was held on September 29, 201 1, At that time, the Parties
reported that a resolution meeting had been held, The hearing was scheduled for
November 29 and December 1, 201 l, and the Parties requested an extension of the
decision date to accommodate the hearing dates. The decision date was extended to
November 30 and thence to December 30, 2011. On November 12, 201 1, the Hearing
Ofﬁcer added an additional hearing day of January 11, 2012. After the ﬁrst day of
hearing, hearing dates of January 17 and 19, 2012, were scheduled. The Panties requested
another extension of the decision date, which was granted on the record of the hearing on
November 29, 2011. The decision date was extended to January 27, 2012.

Parents requested that several witnesses be subpoenaed to appear at the hearing. Those
on the Parents’ list who are current members of the Board staff will be provided by the
Board without subpoena. Those on the Parents’ list who are not residents of Connecticut
cannot be subpoenaed. The Hearing Ofﬁcer agreed to arrange for the remaining witness,
who had been the Student’s Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Shadow A, to be
subpoenaed.

Substantial amounts of time on November 29 and December 1, 2011 were required to
review all documents proffered by the Patties and to determine which ones were relevant
and material to this hearing. After receiving documents from both Parties, the Hearing
Ofﬁcer stated by memo and on the record of the hearing that she was excluding several
classes of documentary submissions. That memo is Appendix A to this decision, and a
list of excluded documents is Appendix B.

At the January 1 1, 2012 hearing session, the Palties agreed to additional hearing dates of
February 1, 13 and 27, 2012 and requested another extension of the decision date. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer extended the decision date to February 24, 2012 on the record of the
hearing. At the hearing session on February 13, the Paities agreed to additional hearing
dates of March 12, 16 and 20, 2012, and requested extension of the decision date to
accommodate these dates. The Hearing Ofﬁcer extended the decision date to March 25,
2012 on the record of the hearing. On the record of the Febmary 28, 2012 hearing
session, the Board requested an additional extension of the decision date. The Hearing
Officer granted that request, and extended the decision date to April 27, 2012 on the
record of the hearing. On March 19, the Board notiﬁed Parents and the Hearing Ofﬁcer

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

5. The Patties discussed a transition in contracted ABA service providers for Student,
and developed a Transition Plan. This Plan went through various revisions: the
February, 2009 version, developed by Contracted ABA Supervisor A, included the
following elements:

Transition Phase 1: The new Behavior Analyst would begin observing Student’s
ABA sessions and meetings about Student in March 2009. Observations would
include:
A) Review of Student’s ﬁles
B) Two initial meetings lasting l‘/2 hours between Board staff Behavioral
Analysts and [prior Contracted ABA Supervisor].
C) Two home obsewational sessions, l‘/z hours each (structured and unstructured
time).
D) Six school observations across a variety of daily activities for l‘/z hours each.
It is expected that at least three observations will be joint obsewations with prior
Contracted [ABA] Supervisor.
E) Two Clinical Team meetings.
Transition Phase 2 New ABA providers will learn to collect Student-speciﬁc
data and to implement speciﬁc teaching strategies and lessons prescribed by the
prior [ABA] Contracted Supewisor. [Detailed description was included, of how
this will be organized and how speciﬁc competencies that would be taught.)
Transition Phase 3 New Board staff ABA instructor(s) will begin to deliver
direct services to Student while prior contracted staff fades back hours of direct
service in the following form:

A) Period one (date TBD) Board 10, Prior provider balance

B) Period two (date TBD) Board 15, Prior provider balance

C) Period three (date TBD) Board 20, Prior provider balance

D) Period four (Date TBD) Board 25, Prior provider balance

E) Final Period (date TBD) Board all hours, Prior provider observes Board

staff delivering all hours until competency reached.
Note: Final competency and direct service hours transition to be determined by
prior Program Supervisor, Board Behavioral Analyst and prior staff.
Determination will be based on tracked performance on competency.
Transition Phase 4 PPT meeting to be held to conﬁrm that all necessary steps
have taken place.

A checklist of 76 speciﬁc competencies for ABA providers was included. (Ex. B—6;
Testimony, Student’s Mother, Tr. 1/11/2012; Tr. 1/ 17/2012)

6. The PPT convened on June 17, 2009, for Student’s annual review and also a triennial
review. The June 10, 2009, notice for this PPT meeting listed as purposes for the
meeting: review or revise IEP, transition planning and ESY [extended school year
services]. The cover sheet for the meeting listed as reasons for the meeting: review or
revise IEP, conduct annual review, review eval/reevaluation, transition planning,
determine eligibility and other: ESY. Present at this meeting were the Elementary
School Principal as Board Administrative Designee, Student’s Mother, Student’s
Regular and Special Education Teachers, a Board S/L Pathologist, Contracted ABA
Supervisor A, Contracted ABA Shadow A, Parents’ Advocate, the Board’s

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

Contracted BCBA Consultant who had recently been hired to supervise ABA services
to the Student, the Board’s Special Services Director, Assistant Special Services
Director, and a Special Education Teacher who was Student’s Case Manager A. The
Student’s primary disability was listed as Autism. (Ex, B-13; B-19; Testimony,
Mother, Tr. 1/ 17/2012)

7. An independent psychological evaluation arranged by Parents and dated March 1 1,
2009, by Independent Psychologist A was presented at the June 17, 2009 PPT
meeting. This evaluator’s summary:

[Student] is an 8 year 4 month old boy whose current level of cognitive
functioning was assessed using the WISC-IV. [Student’s] Full Scale 1Q fell
within the High Average range with strengths in Perceptual Reasoning and
weakness in Processing Speed. On the K-TEA, [Student’s] academic skills were
assessed to be within the Average range in reading, math computation, written
expression, spelling and listening comprehension. He performed within the High
Average range in math concepts and oral expression. Grapho-motor skills were
assessed to be within the Superior range. Memory skills were assessed to be
within the Average range with relative weaknesses in memoxy for faces and
memory for stories. His parents assessed [his] behavior to be within the At Risk
and Clinically Signiﬁcant range for Hyperactivity, Depression, Atypicality,
Attention Problems, Leadership, Activities of Daily Living and Functional
Communication. [ABA Shadow A] assessed [Student] to be in the At Risk range
for Atypicality and Functional Communication. [Student’s] adaptive behavior
was assessed to be within the Moderately Low range in all areas, with the
exception of Motor Skills which were assessed to be in the Adequate range.
Given [Student’s] deﬁcits in language, communication, social relatedness with
peers, attention and stereotypical behaviors, the diagnosis is consistent with the
characteristics associated with Pervasive Developmental Disorder-NOS/ Autism
Spectrum Disorder. ‘
The PPT considered this evaluation and adopted the test scores. However, there were
comments that there had been neither school observation of the Student by the
evaluator nor any contact between the evaluator and school staff working with
Student. (Testimony, Independent Psychologist A., Tr. 1/11/2012; Ex. B-18; 3—19; F-

80)

8. Independent Psychologist A, who evaluates a signiﬁcant number of children on the
autism spectrum and is afﬁliated with the Yale Child Study Center, summarized her
impressions of Student:

[Student] impressed as a very bright child with his cognitive abilities. Academic
abilities were certainly lower, falling within the average range, with the exception
of the writing, and he displayed some concerns in the area of memory, memory
for faces and memory for stories.

Some of the adaptive behavior scores fell within the moderately low range, and he
evidenced some behavioral issues that parents were concerned about, in terms of
hyperactivity, some depression, certainly atypicality, and certainly functional
communication

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120071

10.

I felt that [Student] continued to meet the criteria, because of his deﬁcits in
language, communication and social relatedness with peers, and certainly met the
characteristics of what we see in children with pervasive developmental disorder
on the autism spectmm
He had difﬁculty with self—regulation throughout the sessions, and ...some
difﬁculty with social communication. Based on that, I felt that he had beneﬁted
greatly from the support he had received both in school and certainly in terms of
out of school
And I felt that his program was appropriate, and that, as he was transitioning to a
new school, that it would be essential that his program continue with him and
remain in place until the transition was complete,
This evaluator commented that she was concerned about Student’s reading, and
recommended a reading evaluation. She also remarked that Student was “an
exquisitely sensitive child sensitive to being wrong or being corrected”. She
endorsed the school program developed by Contracted ABA Supewisor as “consistent
with my recommendations”. She also recommended an ESY program for Student.
(Ex. P—216; B-18; Testimony, Independent Psychologist A., Tr. 1/1 1/2012)

Contracted ABA Shadow A provided a repoxt, dated June 2009, of Student’s progress
on IEP goals. She listed progress in social behavior in several kinds of situations and
increasing independence. She worked with Student approximately two-thirds of his
school week and provided his home and community program. (Ex. B-l7)

The June 17, 2009, PPT meeting made the following recommendations:

I Requalify as a special education student with a disability of Autism.

o PPT meeting to be held by October 15, 2009, to add goals and objectives from
[original contracted service provider] and to review program.

0 Reading services 2.5 hours/week in class.

- [S/L] services 3 sessions per 10 day cycle @ 40 minutes each.

0 Conduct occupational therapy evaluation.

0 Scope and sequence of third grade curriculum to be sent to Parent.

0 In—school consult with [school] reading specialist.

- Testing accommodations to include extended time, off—site for CMTs. Evaluate
prior to assessments.

0 Team meetings held twice a month @ 45 minutes each — one to address transition,
one for the school team.

0 Private ABA provider services to include: 30 hours per week ABA therapist in
school, 20 hours per year ABA therapist to attend team meetings, 6 hours per
month program supewision across environments, 4 hours per month transition
planning and 10 hours per year for observations and repotts.

0 Private ABA provider services to include 6 hours per week ABA therapy sewices
in home and community environments, 135 ESY [Extended School Year] bank
hours for summer services and other times, 20 hours per year for home ABA
therapist to attend team meetings. (Ex. B—19)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

1 1. Parents arranged for a communication re—evaluation by Independent S/L A, which
was performed in March and April, 2009. The report of this evaluation was provided
to the School District on June 12, 2009, and discussed at the June 17, 2009 PPT
meeting. This evaluator listed Student’s strengths:

0 Pleasant, excellent work ethic, eager to please, cares about what he does.

0 Curious and interested in a range of topics and subject areas.

0 Makes good use of strategies, Visual and graphic organizers that are provided.

0 Excellent vocabulary knowledge given Visual cues.

0 Strong stmctural language skills and emerging non literal language skills.

0 Emerging sense of narrative.

I Delightful sense of humor and capacity for playfulness and an increasing interest
in playing with others.

Student’s vulnerabilities:
- Difﬁculties with emotional modulation and regulation that can lead to less mature
coping mechanisms and rigidity especially when he is feeling anxious and unsure
as to what is happening, if there are changes in routines, or if he feels otherwise
challenged and less competent.
0 Issues with organization and executive functioning — initiating and taking a task
through to completion in a planful manner.
0 Prompt dependency — continues at times to be reliant on adults providing prompts
and external suppmts to manage work, social, and daily living tasks.
a Weaker language skills when having to produce a logical, sequential, cohesive
explanation or story which is evidenced in dysﬂuencies as he attempts to
formulate his ideas. Similar patterns are seen in his oral reading.
a Word retrieval issues when formulating ideas.
0 Variable in ability to use language and social skills depending on context, and his
own state.
0 Less adept in pragmatic skills when having to inteipret and integrate multiple
sources of information (contextual, social, linguistic),
- Immature social behaviors at times due to pragmatic issues,
On this occasion, [Student’s] standard scores on structural aspects of verbal
language, (comprehension and expression), fell in the high average and superior
range. Narrative abilities, higher level language skills, and writing were in the
average range although relatively lower, reﬂecting his vulnerabilities. Scales that
assess pragmatic and social aspects of communication were less robust, with mild
to moderate delays in many aspects of social functioning in less structured
settings. While one to one with an adult [Student] did well, his negotiation of
social engagement with peers was less secure.

This evaluator had observed Student in school. (Ex. B~14; B-19; P-80)

12. Independent S/L Evaluator A proposed four goals for Student’s 2009—2010 IEP:
1. Word retrieval and speciﬁcity, develop word retrieval ski11s.
2. Develop receptive language
3. Develop expressive language
4. Pragmatic skills (Ex. B-14; P-80)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

13. The prior written notice from the June 17, 2009, meeting included:
Deteimine that Student IS eligible for Special Education, based on educational
performance and evaluation results. Evaluations/assessments Cited were: adaptive
[behavior], cognitive, developmental and social emotiona1 behavior from
independent evaluation in March, 2009, and independent communication
evaluation in March, 2009 and teacher repons in June. The [PPT] received
repoﬂs sharing information and concerns from Parents and outside behavior
therapist, [citing the same assessments]. (Ex. B—19)

14. Actions refused by the June 17, 2009, PPT meeting were also listed:
[Based on the above assessments] District refused Parent request for a reading
evaluation to be conducted by an outside provider. District offered consultation
services by [Board’s] reading specialist. Parent requested additional hrs. from
outside agency for ESY services. District refused request due to [Student’s] level
of performance on evaluations and progress in second grade. (Ex. B—19)

15. Student’s Mother had expressed concerns about his reading, based on observing his
reading at home, including his difﬁculty with homework assignments. She also
studied Student’s reading scores, noting regression and raising technical issues in
letters and at meetings. (Testimony, Mother, Tr. 1/17/2012; Tr. 2/ 13/2012; Tr.

2/ 13/2012)

16. Student’s present levels of academic achievement and functional performance were
reported at the June 17, 2009 PPT meeting:

Parent Concerns: Parent informed the team of the importance of photos, visual
supports and pre-teaching for [Student]. The Parents also supplied the Team with
a report (see attached) of [Student’s] strengths and weaknesses.
Academic/Cognitive: Language Arts: Running record level N 95% accuracy,
comprehension 10 0f 1 1 correct, dictation 32/34, spelling 92/100, DRP 40 (goal
36).

Strengths: Eager to join reading group, sound symbol relationships, responds
well to interventions, suppoﬁs models and organizers, desire to complete work,
literal comprehension, creative, ability to use graphic organizers,
Concerns/needs: ﬂuency, higher level inferential comprehension, organization
and expansion of written responses, implied meaning, understanding main idea,
making connections of text.

Impact of disability on involvement and progress in the general education
curriculum: [Student’s] difﬁculty in reading requires accommodations and
modiﬁcation to the regular education curriculum.

Academic/cognitive: Math: Age Appropriate.

Other Academic/Nonacademic Areas:

Strengths: responds well to class suppoﬁs, models, and interventions.

Concerns/Needs: metacognition, planning, prioritizing, organizing, and executive
tasks, spontaneous language, recall, temporal concepts.

Impact: [Student’s] difﬁculties impact his ability to succeed across the
curriculum without accommodations and supports.

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

Behavioral/Social/Emotional:

Strengths: self advocacy, diligent, interested student, good citizen, eager to
please.

Concel‘ns/needs: inconsistent attention based on environmental input, anxiety
with unknown or unexpected situations, rigidity, heightened sensitivity to new
situations.

Impact: difﬁculties in social cognition require suppotts and accommodations
across the curriculum.

Communication: PVT 109, EVT 114, CELF-4 l 11 Receptive 127 Expressive
108, TLC-Level 1 101, Test of Narrative Language 100, Written Language Scales
96, CCC—2 72.

Strengths: Receptive/Expressive language skills, vocabulary, seeks clarification,
eager to communicate, improved use of verb tense, markers, and connected
speech.

Concerns/needs: social cognition and perspective taking, verbal organization and
expression, verbal speciﬁcity, pragmatic language, presupposion skills, verbal
reasoning, grammar and clarity of longer sections of connected speech.

Impact: Weakness in verbal organization and pragmatic language requires
specialized instruction for [Student] to fully access curriculum.
Vocational/Transition, Health and Development, including Vision and
Hearing, Fine and Gross Motor and Activities of Daily Living were all rated as

age appropriate. (EX. B-l9)

17. The June 17, 2009, IEP included six goals:
1. Within a small group classroom setting, [Student] will demonstrate proﬁciency
in reading decoding [and] reading ﬂuency. (three objectives)
2. [Student] will improve his reading and inferential skills across school, home
and community environments as measured by the following benchmarked
objectives. (six objectives)
3. [Student] will increase social pragmatic skills across school, home and
community setting with peers and family members. (ten objectives)
4. [Student] will increase his learner skills and work behavior across school, home
and community environments when working one-to—one or [in] small dyads with
peers and siblings as measured by the following benchmarked objectives. (two
objectives)
5. [Student] will improve his self—regulating skills across school, home and
community environments when in stmctured and unstmctured settings as
measured by the following benchmarked objectives. (three objectives)
6. [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in language skills necessary to
speak and listen for information, understanding, expression and social interaction.
(ten objectives). (Bx. B-l9; P-80)

18. Program accommodations and modiﬁcations listed for the June 17, 2009, IEP were:

Materials/B00ks/Equipment: personal spelling dictionary. Classroom.
Tests/Quizzes/Assessments: extra time-tests/projects/written work, re-phrase test

questions/directions. All School Sites.

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

Grading: No accommodations

Organization: Linear Graphic Organizers, List Sequential Steps, Post Routines,
Visual Schedules. Classroom, all year, include editing check list.

Environment: minimizing or structure transitions, provide visual suppoms. All
School Sites.

Behavioral interventions and support: cue expected behavior, positive
reinforcement. All School Sites.

Instructional Strategies: check work in progress, concrete examples,
cueing/prompts, graphic organizers, pre-teach content, provide models, suppmt
auditory presentations with Visuals, visuals to support instruction. All School Sites.
Other: use of Visual supports (photos of [Student] doing a variety of activities in a
variety of settings, staff and static individual photos of classmates), work sent home
10 work on mistakes, communication 10g, curriculum scope and sequence sent home
for pre-teaching.

Frequency and duration of supports required for School Personnel to implement
this IEP include: due to space limitation please see * sections within the
recommendations page for details of additional suppons. [One] time per month team
meeting @ 45 minutes. [One] time per month transition team meeting @ 45 minutes,
[Eight] hours per month [Board], BCBA consultation for transition planning and
implementation. (Ex. B—19; P-80)

 

19. The June 17, 2009 PPT recommended special education sewices for Student’s 2009—

2010 school year:

Goals Sp. Ed. Services Frequency Service Implementer Service

2, 3, 4 ABA Services 30 hr/wk Private 1:1 Shadow Inclusion

1 Reading Instruction 2.50 hr/wk Sp. Ed. Teacher Inclusion

2, 3, 4 ABA Services 6 hr/wk Cont. ABA Provider Community

5 ABA Services [As needed] Cont. ABA Provider Community
5 ABA Sewices (Behavior) Private 1:1 Shadow Inclusion

6 S/L Pathology 30 hr/year S/L Pathologist Small group

(Ex. B-19)

20.

21.

The June 17, 2009 PPT offered an ESY program for the summer of 2009 described
as:
Community~based ABA services to address goals 2, 3 and 4, 135.00 hr/Yearly, to
be provided by Contracted ABA Provider from July 6, 2009 to August 14, 2009.

(EX. 13—19)

Although the June 17, 2009, PPT agreed that Student’s program would not be
signiﬁcantly changed for 2009-2010, he moved to a different school because the
Board’s elementary students are grouped K-2 and 3.5. He had a new teacher in third
grade. Although the year started with the same Contracted ABA Shadows, both
resigned during the school year. Both Independent Psychologist A and Independent
S/L A had stressed in their evaluations that the 2008—2009 program should be
changed as little as possible. It is true that his program was very similar to his
program in 2008—2009, but the stafﬁng changed, Parents objected to the staff

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

22.

23.

24.

changes, stating that “consistent program” should include consistent stafﬁng. (Ex. B—
18; P-68; Testimony, Mother Tr. 2/ 13/2012; Testimony, Contracted ABA Shadow A
Tr. 1/17/2012; Testimony, Contracted ABA Shadow B Tr. 2/28/2012)

Student’s third grade Classroom Teacher has a BA. in psychology and education, a
Master’s Degree in Literacy Instmction and is working toward an Ed. D. in
Instructional Leadership. She has almost ten years of teaching experience. She
described Student as friendly and wanting to do the right thing. He put forth his best
effort and always worked hard. He had friends, some of whom had been with him the
prior year. He was an expert in math and he used what he had learned in second
grade in writing. He had trouble with reading ﬂuency, but he did well in
comprehension. He ﬁt into the class well, and was well behaved. She stressed the
importance of developing independence and encouraged her students to help each
other. She instructed Student in reading, in a small group (six students) where he was
comfoﬁable with the Other students. She noted that Student made progress in reading
and writing in her Class. She worried about his absences, coming in late in the
morning and early dismissals. This teacher felt that it was important for the class to
understand that she was in charge, as the teacher, and she directed the Contracted
ABA Shadows to work only with the students to whom they were assigned. She
thought that some role clariﬁcation meetings held during the year helped everyone
understand their classroom roles better. She shared her lesson plans at the beginning
of each ten day cycle with all the adults working in her classroom, so that they could
collaborate. (Ex. B-151; Testimony, Third Grade Teacher. Tr. 5/15/2012)

Student’s Case Manager during his third grade year has sixteen years of teaching
experience, a Master’s Degree in secondary education, Cross Endorsement in Special
Education and a 6th year degree in Special Education Consultation and Collaboration.
She was responsible for seeing that Student’s IEP was implemented, for collecting the
paper work (evaluations, etc) and she also administered some educational
assessments. She was also one of Student’s teachers during both his third and founh
grade school years. She described Student as enthusiastic, cooperative and a little bit
disorganized. She considers his reading issues minor, primarily reading ﬂuency. She
had supported the need for an ESY program during the summer of 2010, and was
disappointed when Parents did not agree. She was concerned about the amount of
instructional time that Student missed because of late arrivals and early dismissals.
She conﬁrmed that Student’s Mother was an active participant in PPT meetings. (Ex.
B-153; Testimony, Third Grade Case Manager, 4/26/20] 1)

The PPT met on September 14, 2009, with Board’s Special Services Assistant
Director, Student’s Mother, S/L Pathologist, Special Education Teacher, Special
Services Director and Student’s Case Manager present. The June 17, 2009, PPT
recommendations were recorded again. The independent S/L evaluation repon was
discussed. The PPT reviewed the psychological evaluation conducted by
Independent Psychologist A. The PPT had accepted test scores from this repoxt, but
cemented that there had been no input from school staff and no school obsewation
of Student. 1n the absence of expected IEP recommendations from the Contracted

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

25.

26,

27.

ABA Supervisor, the PPT agreed to continue the current IEP goals. (Ex. B—l4; B—
18; B23; P—86)

The Board’s Contracted BCBA Consultant provided a progress repoﬂ on some of
Student’s 2008-2009 IEP goals by email dated September 23, 2009:
1. [Student] will demonstrate age appropriate safety skills as measured by the
attainment of the following benehmarked objectives. Goal and ﬁve objectives,
satisfactory progress.
2. [Student] will demonstrate age appropriate self~advocacy and self—regulation
skills by the attainment of the following benchmarked objectives. Goal and six
objectives, satisfactory progress. One objective, mastered.
3. [Student] will improve his ability to plan and organize himself using classroom
guidelines as measured by the objectives below. Goal and four objectives,
satisfactory progress; two objectives mastered.
4. [Student] will increase social pragmatic skills across home, school and
community settings. Goal and eight objectives satisfactory progress. (Ex. B-24)

By letter dated October 8, 2009, Contracted ABA Supewisor notiﬁed the Board that
his organization would be terminating their contract to provide services to Student in
thiity days. The reason given was difficulties between contracted ABA staff and
Board staff. (Ex. B-26)

Contracted ABA Supervisor provided draft goals for Student for 2009—2010 by email

dated October 14, 2009. Goals listed were:

0 [Student] will increase social pragmatic skills across home, school and
community settings with peers and family members as measured by the following
benehmarked objectives. [ﬁve objectives]

0 [Student] will increase his learner skills and work behavior across school, home
and community environments while working one—to-one or small dyads with
peers and siblings as measured by the benchmarked objectives. [one objective]

0 During structured and unstmctured environmental situations, [Student] will
increase his written and expressive language skills across school, home and
community environments. [six objectives]

0 [Student] will increase his understanding of facial expressions as a means of
providing/decoding information (ie. reading expression in books, but has limited
facial expression range) as measured by the following benchmarked objectives.
[two objectives]

a [Student] will improve his self regulation skills across school, home and
community environments when in structured 01‘ unstructured settings as measured
by the following benchmarked objectives. [three objectives]

0 Visual supports will help to improve [Student’s] executive function self-
organizational skills across structured and unstructured school, home and
community environments. [three objectives]

0 [Student] will improve his reading and inferential skills across school, home and
community environments as measured by the following benehmarked objectives,
[seven objectives]

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120071

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

0 [Student] will improve his independence across settings with familiar and
unfamiliar tasks as measured by the following benchmarked objectives, [ﬁve
objectives] (Ex. B-27)

By letter dated October 24, 2009, Contracted ABA Supervisor informed Student’s
Parents that his organization would cease providing services to Student after
November 6, 2009. He wrote that the reason for this change was “. .. treatment of
[his] staff and imposed limitation...” on Contracted ABA Shadows. (Ex. B—31)

Contracted ABA Supervisor submitted recommendations for Student’s 2009—2010

program dated November 4, 2009. Of note:

0 The team should consider the times at which [Student’s] related services and/or
special instmction [are] delivered.

0 summer program should [provide] a minimum of 25 hours per week of

services and no less than six weeks

[need for arrangements to provide services when Student is ill]

[need for collaboration among staff concerning reading instruction]

[need for team meetings “at least 1 x evely 3 weeks”]

[communication 10g between school and home] (EX. B—35a)

The PPT met on November 6, 2009, with SpeciaI Services Director, Student’s
Mother, Regular and Special Education Teachers, Contracted ABA Supervisor A,
Special Services Assistant Director, Contracted ABA Shadow A, Contracted BCBA
Consultant, Principal and Assistant Principal present. (Ex. B—23)

PPT recommendations listed for the November 6, 2009 meeting were:

Reading evaluation to be conducted by [Independent Evaluator E].

[O/T] re-evaluation to be conducted by [Board] staff.

Goals and objectives, as discussed at this meeting be included in 113?.

Reading instruction in the classroom 25 hours per week.

Writing instruction in the classroom 2.5 hours per week.

ABA services 32.5 hours weekly in school.

ABA services 6 hours weekly home and community.

[S/L] services 3 times per 10 day cycle @40 min each.

Social Skills group 0.5 hours per week.

Continue previous level of program supervision, team meetings, and consultations

by ABA provider.

0 Testing accommodations to include extended time for curricular and district tests;
standard administration for GMT.

0 Parent document dated November 6, 2009, Parent letter dated November 4, 2009
and proposed goals from [Contracted ABA Supervisor] presented at the Team
meeting on November 4, 2009, will be attached to the IEP. (Ex. B—37 p.3)

There had been correspondence and discussion of repoﬁed problems in Student’s
third grade classroom at the November 6, 2009 PPT meeting. One of Student’s two

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12~0071

Contracted ABA Shadows was described as intrusive, and the Classroom Teacher
directed her not to interact with other students, Contracted ABA Shadow A had
worked with Student since 2003 and had also provided sewices to him in his ESY
program and in his home and the community. She was providing about two thirds of
his suppon service. She worked with him on social interactions in addition to
providing academic support. She also instituted Student’s Home/School
Communication 10g. She has Bachelor’s and Master’s Degrees in Special Education.
She described working with Student and his classmates to practice conversation skills
and social interactions. The Classroom Teacher had written a letter to the Building
Principal dated October 28, 2009, questioning the Contracted ABA Shadows’ role in
the classroom and with other students. Student’s Classroom Teacher questioned
whether Contracted ABA Shadow A was qualiﬁed to pre-teach Student. When
Contracted ABA Shadow A testiﬁed at the hearing, she denied causing any disruption
in the classroom. It appears from the record that she may have been perceived as a
paraprofessional assigned only to Student. Testimony, Contracted ABA Shadow A,
Tr. 1/17/2012; Testimony, Mother, Tr. 2/13/2012)

33. Contracted ABA Shadow B is a Board Certiﬁed Associate Behavior Analyst
(BCABA), who worked with Student about one—third of the week in school, starting
in school year 2007-2008. He described his job with Student as the same as
Contracted ABA Shadow A:

collecting data, provide support, provide positive reinforcement, to help shape

his behavior, prompting, redirecting, restating things he may have missed, helping

to facilitate social interactions
The data he collected was considered by the Contracted ABA Supervisor and
presented to the PPT, to evaluate Student’s progress and to develop IEPs. He was
aware that his job would be given to a School District Paraprofessional eventually.
At the beginning of Student’s third grade year, he was advised by the C1assroom
Teacher not to interact with other students in the class. Troubled by this limitation on
his ability to assist Student in social interactions pursuant to the IEP, Contracted ABA
Shadow B emailed Contracted ABA Supewisor with his concerns. (Ex. P-7l; P- 210;
Testimony, Contracted ABA Shadow B, Tr. 2/28/2012;

34. The Board’s Special Services Director wrote Contracted ABA Supervisor on
November 9, 2009, requesting that he re-consider his termination of ABA sewices to
Student. Enclosed with this letter was the Board’s job description for “Blind
Shadow” Paraprofessionals. (Ex, B—39)

35. The PPT met on January 20, 2010, with the Board’s Special Services Director,
Student’s Mother, Student’s Father (by telephone), Regular and Special Education
Teachers, S/L Pathologist, Special Services Assistant Director, Current Principal and
Assistant Principal, Independent Psychologist A, Contracted ABA Supervisor A and
Contracted BCBA Consultant present. The reasons given for this meeting were:
review or revise lBP and plan evaluation/i'e-evaluation. The Independent
Psychological Evaluation provided by Parents was reviewed. Student’s reading was
discussed, and the PPT agreed to fund a reading evaluation by Independent Evaluator

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

E. Mother signed consent for release of Student’s school records for this evaluation.
(Ex, B-S7; P-99; P-114; Testimony, Mother, Tr. 2/13/2012)

36. The Prior Written Notice section of the January 20, 2010 PPT record shows the
following actions and refused actions:

37.

The team recommended using “Reading Naturally” program to build ﬂuency for
Student. This action was supponed by Student’s achievement as measured on
10/01/2009; classroom observation on 1/20/2010; communication on ‘6/8/2009;
and teacher repoﬁs on 1/20/2010

Team recommended small group instruction to fulther suppoxt spelling program,
3 xs per week at 30 min. per session, Educational performance and evaluation
results suppot’ted these actions.

Per parent request, school team agreed to remove psychological sewices from the
IEP (i.e., social skills group).

The district agreed to continue to provide 6 hrs/wk [of] ABA services in the home
and community. Educational performance and evaluation results suppon these
actions.

Parents requested a classroom observation by [Independent Psychologist A].
District Will agree to schedule this observation; ﬁmding by Parents.

Team re—i'ecommended ind[ividua1] reading eva1[uation], by Independent
Evaluator E. Parent had initiated evaluation, without returning consent form to
[school] district. Parent signed forms giving permission to conduct ind.
Evaluation and permission to share information. Educational performance and
evaluation results suppon these actions.

Team re-recommended an [OT] re-evaluation to be conducted by [Board staff].
Parent signed permission to evaluate form. Educational performance supports
this action: had been recommended at PPT meetings on 6/17/2009 and 11/6/2009.
Team recommended the following support services from outside [contracted]
ABA Supervisor: program supervision, 6 hrs. per month and transition planning
(including training to para [professional] 4 hrs per month. Educational
performance and evaluation results support these actions.

Team recommended adding 4 hours (one time block) to current services for both
Contracted ABA Supervisor and the Board’s BCBA Consultant. The purpose of
this time is to review and revise behavioral goals in a uniﬁed manner.
Educational performance and evaluation results support these actions. (Bx. B—57;
B-58; B-60)

A Board OT performed an OT evaluation of Student 01] March 17, 2010. The
Summaiy and Recommendations that concluded the report of this evaluation:

[Student’s] assessment results indicate that overall, his Visual motor integration
skills, his ability to perceive a written form correctly and his ﬁne motor
coordination skills are all within the normal limits for a child of his age. In
addition, his handwriting indicates he is able to form his letters with the correct
directionality and use spacing within his written work appropriately if he is given
verbal reminders. His sensory processing skills are appropriate within the context
of the school environment. (Ext B—70)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

38. Student’s scores on his third grade Connecticut Mastery Test (CMT) were at the Goal
level in reading, mathematics and writing in March 2010. (Ex. B—76)

394 Independent Psychologist A observed Student at school on March 19, 2010. She
observed his work in Read Naturally, his participation in a group discussion of
poetry, a writing assignment, gym class, a lesson about Native Americans and a
French lesson. Some of her impressions:
It was evident that [Student] is functioning within a class with a challenging
cun‘iculum in writing, content and foreign language What was striking about
the morning was how hard [Student] worked on his assignments. He exhibited a
very strong focus and attention to the work at hand. He appeared to need several
breaks to help himself with self—regulation and focus. However, in the less
structured setting with other children, [Student’s] lack of social awareness,
impulsivity and dysregulation was vely apparent. While others may interpret this
behavior as immaturity, given [Student’s] history of social deﬁcits, and the level
of sophistication of his peers, [Student’s] behaviors should not be interpreted
lightly.

This evaluator summarized her obsewation:
[Student] impresses as a bright boy who expends a high level of effott and energy
to stay engaged in the learning process. He was socially related to his teachers
and chatted with the boy at the computer. He demonstrated good eye contact and
knowledge of the day’s schedule and what was expected. It is evident that
[Student] has many strengths, but he can also be quite vulnerable in the learning
setting.
It is evident that [Student] continues to be affected by difﬁculty with self-
regulation and social communication. [Student] has clearly beneﬁted from the
support he has received within the school setting and the supplemental support
provided in the home and the community. [Student] will also be exposed to
higher order academic demands as the curriculum becomes more literary,
narrative, and less rote, requiring more interpretation, generalization, and
inferential thinking skills, all weaknesses for [Student]. [Student] continues to
show vulnerability in reading and adjustments to his program will be needed once
his reading evaluation is completed. (Ex. P-159, B-106)

40‘ The PPT met on March 24, 2010, with Principal, Student’s Mother, Regular and
Special Education Teachers, S/L Pathologist, an OT, the Board’s Director and
Assistant Director of Special Sewices, Parents’ Advocate, Contracted ABA
Supervisor and Board BCBA Consultant present. The meeting notice gave review of
evaluation and extended school year as the reasons for this meeting. The PPT
recommendations were:

- Administer home sensory proﬁle as part of OT evaluation (consent provided).
I ESY services 1 hour per day/ 6 weeks— language arts instruction in decoding,
reading ﬂuency, comprehension and writing mechanics.

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

41

42.

43.

44.

The prior written notice for the PPT meeting includes conduct a re-evaluation, OT
sensory proﬁle and Implement IEP. (Ex. B~74; B-75; P—127; Testimony, Mother, Tr.
2/ 13/2012)

. Board’s Reading Consultant has almost thirty years of experience as an elementary

school teacher, reading specialist and resource teacher. She described the School
District’s reading program, Reader’s Workshop, as based on the ﬁve pillars of
literacy: phonemic awareness, phonics, comprehension, ﬂuency and vocabulary.
Teachers often ask her to screen children to help determine if they might need
additional specialized help with reading. She was asked to screen Student at the
beginning of his third grade year, 2009-2010. She described him as having a good
foundation, and she obsewed him doing well working in a small reading group with
his Classroom Teacher. She gave him a Dibels [reading test] to assess his oral
reading ﬂuency at the beginning of the school year, mid-year and at the end of the
year. At the end of third grade, his reading rate was 67 words per minute. He did
have an issue with ﬂuency and rate of reading, which the Reading Consultant
attributed in part to his self—monitoring and thinking about whatever he was reading.
She did not think that he needed special help with phonics, and she thought he would
do well in the regular reading curriculum, cementing that his classroom teacher was
a very good reading teacher. The Reading Consultant saw that his Fountas and
Pinnell (F &P) comprehension scores were good. She did not recommend any
changes in his reading program, which was small group instluction. She did
recommend Read Naturally, a computer program, to help improve his ﬂuency. In
early October 2009, Student’s Mother inquired about Read Naturally and also asked
Student’s classroom teacher to provide his F&P scores. Classroom teacher responded
that the scores were not allowed to leave the classroom, and that Read Naturally helps
with ﬂuency, comprehension and accuracy. (Ex. P-210; Testimony, Reading
Consultant, Tr. 5/22/2012)

After ﬁfteen hours of training, the Board Paraprofessional assigned to work with
Student was given a Certiﬁcate of Completion of the Basics of Applied Behavior
Analysis in Children with Autism and Related Disorders on May 31, 2010. (Ex. B-77)

The result of the OT’s Home Sensory Proﬁle, as completed by Student’s Parents and
repmted by a Board OT on June 3, 2010, was identiﬁcation of two Sections of
Deﬁnite Difference: Auditoty Processing and Modulation of Movement Affecting
Emotional Responses and four Sections of Probable Difference: Multisensory
Processing, Modulation of Visual Input Affecting Emotional Responses and Activity
Level, Emotional/Social Responses and Behavioral Outcomes of Sensory Processing.
Two Factors of Deﬁnite Difference found were: Sensory Seeking and Inattention and
Distractibility. Two F actors of Probable Difference found were: Emotionally
Reactive and Poor Registration. (Ex. B-82)

Contracted ABA Supervisor and Board’s BCBA Consultant met to develop proposed
goals and objectives for Student for 201 0-201] school year. They submitted these
goals and objectives on June 3, 2010. (Ex. P—136)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

45. The PPT met on June 9, 2010, with Principal, Student’s Mother, Regular and Special
Education Teachers, an OT, S/L Pathologist, the Board’s Director and Assistant
Director of Special Services, Parents’ Advocate, the Contracted ABA Supervisor and
the Board’s BCBA Consultant present. This was an annual review meeting. Present
Levels of Academic Achievement and Functional Performance were recorded.

Parent concerns: As the result of the termination of [Student’s] home program
and multip1e staff changes this school year, [Student’s] challenges brought about
by ASD, overall language issues, dyslexia, the increased academic expectations
for reading in his third grade classroom and at home, were compounded. Based
on the information available to us at this time, it is our position that [Student] has
struggled to access the LRE.

Academic/Cognitive: Language Arts: (6/2010) F ountas & Pinnell Instructional
Level Q 55 wpm, 96% acc. 7/9 comp. Dibles 67 wpm (goal 107) Fry’s Word
Phrases Level 22 53.57 wpm 92% acc; Gates McGinitie Vocab GB 4.9, Comp 5.1
Total 4.9

Strengths: seIf—correcting, eager to learn and join the group, [good]
comprehension of stories read to him, able to use graphic organizer, uses
resources to add descriptive details, words, and similes to vm‘iting, with support
and frameworks [Student] has strong initiation and stamina to complete the task.
Concerns/Needs: ﬂuency, amount of self—con‘ection, spelling in context, creating
and adding suppotting details in written work.

Impact of Student’s Disability: [Student’s] difﬁculties in reading ﬂuency,
spelling, and expanding written work require accommodations and modification
to the regular education curriculum. This limits his ability to gain information
from text across all areas of the cun'iculum.

Academic/Cognitive: Math: Age Appropriate.

Other Academic/Nonacademic Areas: WISC-IV VCI 110 PR1 123 WM 110
PSI 103 FSIQ 1 17 ([Independent Psychologist A 2/2009) K-TEA-H Reading
Comp SS 95, Math Comp 112, Written Lang Comp 89 Oral Lang Comp 1 12
([Independent Psychologist A 2/2009)

BehavioraUSocial/Emotional: Expanding age appropriate peer relationships.
BASC—H parents form Behavior Symptom Index 69 adaptive Composite 35
(Independent Psychologist A 2/2009); repetitive behaviors or self—talk may be
displayed when stressed.

Strengths: self advocacy, diligent, interested student; good citizen; eager to
please, improvement in ability to follow classroom routines, increased
participation in school and community activities, problem solving, active
participant with peers, displays empathy and humor.

Concerns/Needs: inconsistent attention based on environmental and movement,
anxiety in unknown or unexpected situations, heightened sensitivity to new
situations, difﬁculty detecting and interpreting social cues.

Impact: Difﬁculties in social cognition require suppoxts and accommodations
across the curriculum.

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

Communication: PPVT 109, EVT 114, CELF-4 111 Receptive 127 Expressive
108, TLC-Level 1 101, Test ofNarrative Language 100, Written Language Scales
96, CCC—2 72.

Strengths: Receptive/expressive language skills; vocabulary; seeks clariﬁcation;
eager to communicate; improved use of verb tense markers.

Concerns/Needs: social cognition and perspective taking; verbal organization
and expression; verbal speciﬁcity; pragmatic language; presuppositional skills;
verbal reasoning; grammar and clarity in longer sections of connected speech,
repertoire of topics and events in conversations.

Impact: Weakness in verbal organization and pragmatic language requires
specialized instruction for [Student] to fully access curriculum.
Vocational/I'ransition: Health and Development — including Vision and
Hearing: Fine and Gross Motor; and Activities ofDaily Living were all
marked Age Appropriate. (Ex. B-84)

46. June 9, 2010, PPT recommendations for 2010-201 1 school year were:

0 Phonics instruction 2.5 hours per week small group.

0 Reading instmction 5.0 hours per week in class by special education teacher.

- Writing instruction 2.5 hours per week in class by special education teacher.

0 Read Naturally 2.5 hours per week suppoﬁed by paraprofessional.

- Behavioral support 32.5 hours per week by [Board] paraprofessional.

o Behavioral supervision by BCBA 8 hours per month to include 45 min per week
direct instruction after school.

- After school academic support by certified teacher 3 days per week at 45 minutes
each.

I 35.5 hour school week.

0 [S/L] 45/40 minute sessions.

0 Testing accommodations — distriCt/start in class, extended time as needed, reader,
CMT/off—site, extended time, reader for directions and math. (Ex. B-84; P—139)

47. June 9, 2010, goals for the 2010-2011 year were:
1. Within a small group classroom setting, [Student] will demonstrate proﬁciency
in reading decoding and ﬂuency. (Five objectives)
2. [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in comprehension skills necessary
to read for information and understanding. (Three objectives)
3. [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in the mechanics of written
language such as spelling, capitalization and punctuation necessary to write for
infomiation, understanding and written expression. (Three objectives) . I
4. [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in written language skills necessary ‘ i
to write for information, understanding and written expression. (Six objectives) ‘
5. [Student] will increase social pragmatic skills across home, school and
community settings. (Eight objectives)
6. Studem will improve his ability to plan and organize himself using classroom
guidelines as measured by the objectives below. (Five objectives)
7. [Student] will demonstrate age appropriate self—advocacy and self~regulation
skills as measures by the attainment of the following benchmarked objectives.

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

(Seven objectives)

8. [Student] will demonstrate age appropriate safety skills as measured by the
attainment of the following benchmarked objectives. (Five objectives)

9. [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in language skills necessary to
speak and listen for information, understanding, expression and social interaction.
(Nine objectives)

Mother questioned the need for work on social skills. (Ex. B-84; Testimony, Mother,
2/13/2012)

48. Program accommodations and modiﬁcations for Student’s program for the next year
included:

Materials/Books/Equipment: Personal Spelling Dictionary in the classroom.
Tests/Quizzes/Assessments: Orally Read tests/Directions, rephrase Test
Questions/Directions. All School Sites

[N0 modiﬁcations for grading]

Organization: Linear Graphic Organizers, List Sequential Steps, Rephrase Test
Questions/Directions. Classroom all year, include editing check list.
Environment: Minimizing or Structure Transitions, Provide Visual Suppoﬁs.
All School Sites.

Behavioral Interventions and Supports: Cue expected behavior, Positive
Reinforcement. All School Sites.

Instructional Strategies: Check Work in Progress, Concrete Examples,
Cueing/Prompts, Graphic organizers, Pre—teach Content, Provide Models, Support
Auditoxy Presentations with visuals, Visuals to Support Instruction. All School
Sites.

Other: Use of visual supports (photo’s of [Student] doing a variety of activities
in a variety of settings, staff and static individual photos of classmates), work sent
home to work on mistakes, communication 10g, curriculum scope and sequence
sent home for pre-teaching. Across all areas.

Frequency and Duration of Supports: One to one [School District]
paraprofessional throughout school day, behavioral supervision 8 hrs/month to
include one 45 min. session per week after school direct instruction, 3 days per
week aﬁer school homework support by [School District] celtiﬁed teacher.

(Ex. B—84)

49. The June 9, 2010 PPT recommended special education services for Student’s 201 O-

2011 school year:
Goals Sp.Ed.Services Frequency Servicelmplementer Sewice

5-8
5-8
-4

N

a

l
1
1
1
3,4
9

Behavioral Support 32.5 hI/wk Paraprofessional Inclusion/gen ed
Social Skills lnstruc 0.75 hr/wk Behavior Supervisor Individual instruction
Academic Suppon 2.25 hr/wk Gen, Sp Ed teachers Individual instruction

Reading Instruction 2.50 hI/Wk Sp Ed Teacher Small group/individual
Reading Instruction 5.00 hr/wk Gen, Sp Ed teachers lnclusion/gen ed
Reading Instruction 2.50 hr/wk Paraprofessional Inclusion/gen ed
Writing instruction 2.50 hr/wk Sp Ed Teacher Inclusion/gen ed

S/L 30 hr/yearly S/L Pathologist Small group

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

This page also noted Language Arts instruction one hour a day in a small group for an
ESY program. (EXT B-84)

50, School staff sent a communication sheet/log home with Student every school day,
recording day to day events, what happened in class and how Student performed in
Class. (Ex. P-183; Testimony, Case Manager B, T1: 12/1/2010)

51. Student’s 2009—2010 Grade 3 Progress Report shows ratings in November 2009,
March 2010 and June 2010. Student’s grades were not modiﬁed. The June ratings:

 

Subject Exceeds Meets Beginning to meet
Expectations Expectations Expectations

Reading 5 7 1

Spelling 1 2

Handwriting 3

Information Technology 4

Writing 5 3 1

Science 7

Social Studies 3 2

Math Content 13 5

Math Process 5 2

Social Skills 8

Work Habits 16

Library 5

A11 6 1

Physical Education 6

Music 2 5 (Ex. B95)

52. Contracted ABA Supervisor provided an IEP repon for Student’s school year 2009—

2010. He reported progress on ABA—related goals graphically. His summary noted:
[Student’s] year has been a year of progress despite the variety of program
distractions, questions and complication with team dynamics. .. He has made
some nice progress, but still has his ongoing needs and deﬁcit areas that will need
to be continually addressed

Data collection and work samples for 2009—2010, totaling 198 pages, were submitted

for the record. (Ex. B-85, B-100)

53. The PPT offered an ESY program of three hours a day, from July 6, 2010 to August
13, 2010 but Parents refused that service. (Ex. B-103)

54. After school services for homework support three days a week for 45 minutes each
had been offered at the June 9, 2010 PPT meeting, but were refused by Parents. (Ex.
B-84; B—112)

55‘ The Special Education Teacher who worked with Student during his fourth grade year
has twenty—nine years of teaching experience. She holds a Masters Degree with

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

emphasis on leaming disabilities She has extensive experience with teaching
reading, including training in several reading programs. She worked with Student
within his classroom every day and described him as always willing to volunteer, and
very well—rounded. She noted his problems with getting started and organization,
“but not much different from other fourth grade boys”. In her view, he had difﬁculty
with ﬂuency in reading that did not affect his comprehension. He ﬁt into a reading
group in his classroom. He was frequently late in the morning, and she would help
him catch up with reading which was scheduled at 8 am. She also helped him with
writing in the aﬁernoon evely day, and his frequent early dismissals were a problem.
She stated that Student responded very well to the reading program, and made
appropriate progress through the school year. He had an incredible vocabulary, and
used it in writing. She disagreed with the Independent Literacy Evaluation because
she knew that many of the suggestions given by the Evaluator were already in place.
(Ex, B—154; Testimony, Special Education Teacher, Tr. 5/22/2012)

56. Student’s fourth grade Case Manager has ﬁfteen years of teaching experience. She
has a Master’s Degree in psychology and Intermediate Administration Certiﬁcation.
She collaborates with Student’s various teachers to develop a draft IEP for the PPT to
consider. She attended Student’s PPT meetings from June, 2010, through the 2010—
2011 school year. She stated that Student’s Mother was an active palticipant in all
PPT meetings. (Ex. B-157; Testimony, Fourth Grade Case Manager B., Tr.

12/1/2011)

57. The PPT met on September 7, 2010 with Principal, Student’s Mother, Regular and
Special Education Teachers, S/L Pathologist, Director and Assistant Director of
Special Services, Parent Advocate and [Contracted BCBA Consultant] present The
Parent had requested this meeting. The prior written notice for this meeting includes:
Actions Proposed: continue current IEP; assistive technology evaluation, consent
received.
Actions Refused: removal 0ft1‘ansition plan; reinstatement of 1 1/2008 IEP with
prior contracted service providers; independent reevaluation; outside provider for
writing instruction; reimbursement for parent-provided Orton—Gillingham
[reading] instwction; and funding of several independent evaluations.

(Ex. B-109; P—161)

58‘ Student’s 2010—201 1 GMT accommodations included reading of directions and test
items, except for the reading portion of the test, which would have reading of
directions only. (Ex. B-1 9; Testimony, Case Manager, Tr. 12/1/2011)

59. The Board gave Student an Assistive Technology (AT) evaluation during October
and November, 2010. The evaluator has a Master’s Degree in S/L and a sixth year
degree in special education with a specialty in Assistive Technology. She had
worked with Student as an S/L Pathologist prior to the AT evaluation. Her

Reconmlendations:
1. [Student] should have direct weekly instruction in keyboarding to build
familiarity with letter placement on the keyboard.

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

2. [Student] should be taught features of Read and Write Gold that would include

word prediction, reading feature, spell check and homophone check.

3. Worksheets can be scanned into the computer as needed and Read and Write

Gold can be used to read directions to him. This provides for greater

independence and helps insure accuracy when reading and completing

worksheets.

4. Additional features of Read and Write Gold need to be added as requirements

increase in the curriculum These could include using the outline/graphic

organizer (either Draft Builder or Read and Write Gold as needed) as well as the

highlighting features in order to collect facts.

5. Features should be demonstrated to and practiced by [Student] one at a time so

that he builds ﬂuency with using each part. Decisions can be made as to what

features are working for [Student] for various tasks as he continues to develop

skills in reading and writing and use of technology.

6. A copy of Read and Write Gold will be provided to the family for use at home.
(Ex. B-113; B~155; Testimony, AT Evaluator/S/L Pathologist, Tr. 4/26/2012)

60. As Student’s S/L Pathologist, she had observed his improvement in organization of

61.

language, ability to sequence sentences and ideas, and to maintain a topic across
multiple turns. She reported that he had improved his social, pragmatic and
communication skills and was an effective advocate for himself. (Testimony, S/L
Pathologist/AT Evaluator, Tr. 4/26/2012)

Student’s Case Manager B sent Parents an IEP progress report dated November 19,
2010. Goals marked “*” added aﬁer June 17, 2010 PPT meeting, with consent from
Parents:
Goal 1: [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in comprehension skills
necessary to read for information and understanding; four objectives, Satisfactory
Progress
Goal 2: [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in the mechanics of written
language such as spelling, capitalization and punctuation necessary to write for
information, understanding and written expression. three objectives, Satisfactory
progress
Goal 3: [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in written language skills
necessary to write for information, understanding and written expression. Five
objectives, satisfactory progress; one objective, not introduced
Goal 4: Within a small group classroom setting, [Student] will demonstrate
proﬁciency in reading decoding and ﬂuency. Five objectives, satisfactory
progress
Goal [5]: [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in language skills necessary
to speak and listen for information, understanding, expression and social
interaction. Three objectives mastered, six objectives, satisfactory progress,
Goal [6]: [Student] will demonstrate age appropriate safety skills as measured by
the attainment of the following benchmarked objectives. Five objectives,
satisfactory progress.

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

Goal [7]: [Student] will demonstrate age appropriate self—advocacy and self-
regulation skills as measures by the attainment of the following benchmarked
objectives. Five objectives, satisfactory progress.

*Goal [8]: When confronted with a difﬁcult situation across environments,
[Student] will independently verbalize and act on realistic expectations for
himself. One objective, satisfactory progress.

Goal [9]: Student will improve his ability to plan and organize himself using
classroom guidelines as measured by the objectives below. Five objectives,
satisfactory progress.

Goal [10]: Student] will increase social pragmatic skills across home, school and
community settings. Five objectives, satisfactory progress.

*Goal [1 1]: When engaged in indoor or outdoor games, [Student] will
demonstrate an understanding of the game and its rules, and the ability to abide by
the established rules. Two objectives, satisfactory progress. (B-116)

62. A Literacy Evaluation of Student was performed by Independent Evaluator F. in
January, 201 1, at the Soifer Center. The report of this evaluation, dated March 11,
201 1, was received by the Board on June 13, 2011, The evaluator is identiﬁed as an
Educational Therapist and a Wilson Ceniﬁed Instructor, with a Masters Degree in

education.

Student’s scores on the Gray Oral Reading Test—4 (GORT-4) Form A were
average for comprehension and poor for rate, accuracy and ﬂuency.

On the Test of Written Language-3 (TOWL—3) Form A he scored average in
vocabulary and sentence combining; below average in style, logical sentences,
contextual conventions, contextual language, story construction, contrived writing
and overall writing; and poor in spelling and spontaneous writing.

On the Woodcock—Johnson HI Tests of Achievement, F cm A, he scored above
his then-current grade placement in oral language, broad math, broad written
language, basic reading, reading comprehension, math calculation, written
expression, academic skills and academic applications. He was close to his then—
cun'em grade placement in oral expression and below his grade placement in
broad reading and academic ﬂuency.

In subtests of the Woodcock—Johnson, he scored above his then-current grade
placement in story recall, calculation, spelling, applied problems, writing samples,
story recall-delay and reading vocabulary. He was close to his then-current grade
placement in letter-word identiﬁcation, writing ﬂuency and passage
comprehension. He was below his then-cui‘rent grade placement in reading
ﬂuency, understanding directions, math ﬂuency and picture vocabulary.

On the Gray Diagnostic Reading Tests — Second Edition Form A (GORT), he
scored in the average range in letter/word recognition, phonetic analysis, reading
vocabulary, listening vocabulary, phonological awareness, decoding,
comprehension and general reading. He scored below average in meaningful
reading and rapid naming.

He scored below average on the Test of Silent Word Reading Fluency Form B
(TOSWRF). (Ex. P—l78)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

63. The March 201 1 Literacy evaluator made recommendations, many of which had
already been implemented by the PPT. (Ex. P—178)

64. Student’s scores on the March, 201 1, CMT were: proﬁcient in reading, at goal in
writing and advanced in math‘ (B420)

65, The PPT met on March 21, 201 1, with Director and Assistant Director of Special
Sewices, Student’s Mother, Principal, Regular and Special Education Teachers, S/L
Pathologist, Contracted BCBA Consultant and Parents’ Advocate present. The
meeting had been called to review the AT evaluation. The prior written notice from
this meeting included:

Team agreed to implement use Of soﬁware noted in the [AT] Eva1uation dated
Oct/Nov 2010 in order to suppon [Student] academically. These additional
suppoﬂs are noted on the Accommodations page of the IEP.
Team agreed that [Student] will paiticipate in a typing/keyboarding group 1X per
week for 30 minutes. This change is reﬂected on page 11 of the IEP, as well as
the addition of goal #10:

[Student] will demonstrate improvement in keyboarding skills.

(Bx, B—122)

66. The PPT met on June 9, 201 1, to review outside evaluations arranged by Parents.
Present at this meeting were Principal, Student’s Mother, Regular and Special
Education Teachers, S/L Pathologist, Contracted Behavior Supervisor, Assistant
Director of Special Services, Case Manager, Parents’ Advocate and Independent
Evaluator E. The discussion of the Literacy Evaluation was limited because the
School had not received a copy of the evaluation, which was dated March 1 1, 201 1,
prior to the meeting. The Team agreed to continue this discussion at the annual
review PPT, scheduled for June 15, 2011, when a Board School Psychologist would
be present. (Ex. B-127; P’177; P-178)

67. The PPT convened for Student’s annual review on June 15, 201 1. Present were
Director and Assistant Director of Special Services, Student’s Mother, Regular and
Special Education Teachers, School Psychologist, S/L Pathologist, Contracted BCBA
Consultant, Principal, Parents’ Advocate and Independent Psychologist D. The prior
written notice for this meeting:

District refused payment for compensatory services. District refuses Parent
request for compensation for Orton Gillingham [reading] instruction. District
notes [that it] has provided the appropriate services and IE? to meet [Student’s]
needs. [District] also continues to recommend after school suppom for 2125 hours
a week.

District refused payment of [evaluations] by [Independent Psychologist A,
Independent Psychologist D and Independent Evaluator A], District had
previously offered to fund [evaluations] from a mutually agreed upon evaluator
but did not agree to fund these evaluations. District did agree to fund
[Independent S/L Evaluator A’s evaluation],

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

68.

District refused Parent request to revise IEP noting the [evaluations] from
[Independent Psychologist A and Independent S/L Evaluator A] as the 2009
triennial of record. District noted that it had agreed to an evaluation that was not
completed by [Independent Evaluator A].

District refused Parent’s request for 1 :1 Orton Gillingham instruction and re-
evaluation by [Independent Evaluator A and Independent Psychologist A].
[District] is recommending a program that provides reading and writing support
appropriate to meet [Student’s] needs.

District refused Parent request to revise IEP to reinstate previous ABA program.
District notes that it continues to recommend and provide an appropriate program
that meets [Student’s] educational needs.

District refused Parent request to remove Contracted Behavior Specialist from
[Student’s] educational program, District notes that a provider from the same
agency will be providing the services as outlined in the IEP per PPT
recommendations.

District reﬁlsed Parent request to contract with outside provider for supervision of
language alts and [S/L] program. District is providing an appropriate [District]
program that meets [Student’s] educational needs and that he is making progress
in these areas.

District refused Parent request for 1:1 [S/L] therapy services [for Student].
District notes progress made in small group format. District further notes need for
[Student] to apply these skills with peers in a structured SLP setting: sewices
delivered by [District] staff. (Ex. B-130; P-180)

Student’s 4‘h grade progress report showed June, 2011 grades. Student’s grades were
not modiﬁed.

 

Subject Exceeds Meets Beginning to meet
Expectations Expectations Expectations

Reading B+ 1 7 3
Writing B 1 6 2
Spelling 8— 2 1

Math Content A- 7 11

Math Process 1 6

Handwriting 1 1

Social Studies A- 6

Science A 3 4

Information Tech. 4

Work Habits 13 3

Social Skills 8

Library A 5

World Language 2 3

Art A 2 5

Physical Education A 6

Music A 5 2 (Ex. B—134, P~192)

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

69. Student’s fouith grade Classroom Teacher has Master’s Degrees in special Education
and in Teclmology/School Library Media. She has more than ten years of teaching
experience. She described Student as enthusiastic, helpful and well~behaved. He
made progress during his fouith grade year, both academically and socially. She
observed Student’s ABA Shadow suppmting him and encouraging his independence.
She has worked with Student to improve his reading ﬂuency, and repoxts progress
through the school year. He has had assistance with phonics and with ﬂuency. With
more than two hours a day devoted to reading and writing and the assistance of a
special education teacher, it is possible to provide an appropriate reading program for
Student. His frequent lateness to school in the morning and early dismissals were a
problem because he missed instructional time. (Ex. B-152; Testimony. Fourth Grade
Teacher, Tr. 5/15/2012)

70. Independent Psychologist D observed Student in school on June 8, 2010 and
September 27, 2010, during his snack, math class, math test, science class, lunch and
indoor recess and writing class, This evaluator’s recommendations reﬂected a lack of
awareness of Student’s cun‘ent program and support staff.

0 There is a BCBA Coordinator supervising his program.

0 Parents have rejected a social skills program for Student.

t ESY services have been provided in the past and were offered in 2011.

a Team Meetings have been held approximately twice a month for several years
(see Findings of Fact 2 and 76).

0 Data collection continues. (Ex. P—193, P-94, P—184, P-247, R248, P-217)

71. Student’s attendance was a concern to school staff members. Concerns focused on
illnesses, being late to school in the morning, and early dismissal at Parent request.

Absent Late arrival Early dismissal
2009-2010 31 19 4
2010-2011 23 26 18

The reported results were Student’s missing moming routine and schoolwork,
morning organizational time, missing writing, and missing phonics. (Ex. B-148)

72. The Board’s Director of Special Services has a Master’s Degree and a PhD. (ABD)
in Counseling Psychology. She has Connecticut certiﬁcation in School Psychology
and Administration and more than thjity years of experience as a school psychologist
and an administrator. Based on what staff members have told her as well as her
observations, Student is well liked by his classmates and teachers. He has Autism,
which she considers mild and moderate learning disabilities that affect his reading.
He is a full participant in his regular education classroom, and requires no 1
modification of the curriculum. She attended many PPT meetings for Student, and
stated that Student’s Mother was an active patticipant in PPT discussions. (Ex. B-
160; Testimony, Director of Special Services, Tr. 5/7/2012)

73. The Board’s Assistant Special Services Director has more than thirty years of
experience as a teacher and school administrator. She has a Master of Science degree
and Intermediate Administrator and Supervisor Celtiﬁcation. She repotted that there

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

74.

75.

76.

77.

had been times when the school asked Parents to approve a minor change in Student’s
IEP without holding a PPT meeting. When Parents did not agree, the school did not
implement the change. She stated that she had no knowledge of any staff member
discriminating against Student, and that from what she had observed, all the staff
members who worked with Student were dedicated to working with him and his
parents. She is qualified to supervise teachers and other sewice providers, and she
has obsewed. those who work with Student and believes that they are well qualiﬁed
and dedicated to his program. (Ex. B-159; Testimony, Assistant Special Sewices
Director, Tr. 3/12/2012)

From time to time, the Board contacted Parents requesting agreement to minor
changes in Student’s IEP without calling a PPT meeting. Those requests included in
the record of the hearing demonstrate cooperation:

 

Date Exhibit number Proposed change Disposition
9/ 14/2009 B-23, P-85 Amendment No signature
2/24/2010 B-65, P—121 CMT accommodations Parent Signed
9/7/2010 B—l 19 CMT Accommodations Parent Signed
11/18/2010 B-115, P-168 Amendment No signature
2/18/201 1 B—l 19, P-168 CMT Accommodations Parent signed.

Many times, Parents emailed letters to school staff members immediately prior to a
scheduled PPT, with questions and suggested discussion topics. Since these requests
required a speciﬁc school staff member to be present at the PPT meeting after
reviewing the request and preparing a response, it was Often impossible to address
Parental questions and concerns immediately. In most cases, the meeting notice
included reason(s) for the meeting and the PPT Chair had introduced an agenda at the

beginning of the meeting.

PPT date Date, number of pages of Parent letter

11/6/2009 11/4/2009; 7 pages (Ex. P—93, B-36, B—37)

1/20/2010 1/19/2010; 6 pages (Ex. B-56, B-57; P—113, P-114)

3/24/2010 3/24/2010; 3 pages (Ex. B-73, B-74; P-124, P-125, P~126, P-127)

6/9/2010 6/8/2010; 9 pages (Bx. B—83, B~84; P-134, P-135, P—138)

9/7/2010 9/3/2010; 9 pages (Bx. B-108, B-109; P-161) ;
6/9/2011 6/2/2011; 2 pages (B-127)

6/15/2011 6/13, 6/15/2011; 5 pages (Ex. B-129, B-131)

Agendas and Notes from some of the Team Meetings held twice a month for Board
staff members working With Student, with Mother invited to attend, were entered on
the record ofthe hearing. (P—71 (15 pages); P-184 (2 pages); P-247 (67 pages); P— i
248 (8 pages»

C1assroom/Communieation logs and data collection were entered on the record of the
hearing. (Ex. B-144 (166 pages); B-99 (194 pages); B-lOO (198 pages); P—144 (33
pages); P-209 (10 pages); and P-248 (8 pages))

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

78. Student work samples were entered on the record of the hearing. (P—153 (39 pages);
P-154 (50 pages); P-186 (16 pages); P—187 (43 pages); P—188 (20 pages); P-189 (19
pages); P-208 (12 pages): B96 (8 pages); B-101 (74 pages); B~143 (52 pages); and
B—146 (172 pages»

79. Although Parents have signed consent for AT and OT evaluations and for release of
Student’s records to outside evaluators selected by themselves, they have not
consented to the triennial evaluation due to be performed by the Board during 2009.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1. Section 10-76h, Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.), and related regulations at
Section 10-76h, Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, authorize an impartial
hearing ofﬁcer to conduct a special education hearing and to render a ﬁnal decision in
accordance with Sections 4~176e through 4-180a, inclusive, and Sections 4— 1 81a 0fthe
C.G.Si Section 20 U.S.C. § 1415(f) and related regulations at 34 C.F.R. § 300.511
through § 300.520 also authorize special education hearings.

2. Board ofEducation offhe Hendrick Hudson Central School District v, Rowley, 553
IDELR 656 (US. 1982) established a two prong test for determining whether a special
education program is appropriate for a speciﬁc student in need of special education.

First, has the school district followed the procedural rules of the IDEA, and second, is the
special education program offered appropriate to the student’s individual needs. In this
case, Parents’ allegations of procedural errors are without substance. The special
education program and placement offered to the Student has been reasonably calculated
to address his special education needs. PPT recommendations of after school homework

suppon and ESY have been refused by Parents.

3. Pursuant to 34 CPR. §300.300 (a) and (c), parental consent is required for an initial
evaluation for consideration of eligibility for special education and for the required
subsequent triennial re-evaluations of students in need of special education. Parents have
not consented for the school to perform a triennial evaluation.

4. Pursuant to 34 CPR. §300.502, parents may secure and pay for independent
evaluations of children who are eligible for special education. The reports of such
evaluations must be considered by the PPT if they are shared with the school, but the PPT
is not required to accept recommendations from independent evaluations obtained by
Parents, or to fund such evaluations.

5. Pursuant to 34 C.F.R. §300.502 (b), if the Board has performed an evaluation of a Child
in need of special education with which the parent disagrees, the parent may request an
independent evaluation at public expense. If the PPT refuses to fund such an evaluation,
the Board is required to request a special education hearing to determine whether the
Board’s evaluation was appropriate.

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

6. Pursuant to Section 10—76h(d)(1), C.G.S., a special education hearing ofﬁcer may order
an evaluation 01‘ reevaluation of a student receiving special education when parents have
refused consent to evaluate.

7. Pursuant to Section 10-220 (a), C.G.S., a local Board of Education has the authority to
hire and to dismiss teachers and other school staff members. A special education hearing
ofﬁcer may issue an order to hire or assign a speciﬁcally qualiﬁed professional. Parents
may suggest their choices of staff, but may not control assignment of particular school
staff or contracted staff to provide educational services to their child.

8. Pursuant to 34 C.F.R. §§300.507 (a) (2) and 300.511 (6), claims for reliefin due
process hearings are limited to events that occurred within the past two years.

9. Pursuant to 34 C.F.R. §300.515 (d), special education hearings must be::
...eonducted at a time and place that is reasonably convenient to the parents. ..

10. As a matter of ethical professional practice, some standardized educational and
psychological tests may not be repeated within a speciﬁed time period, because scores on
the second (or more) administration may be unreliable. When a parent arranges for an
independent evaluation, one result may be that the PPT is limited in the range of
standardized tests that may be administered to that student subsequently.

11. The case of Ridley School District v. MR. 58 IDELR 271 (3rd Cir. 2012) addresses,
among other issues, the selection of a reading program preferred by parents and the lack
of speciﬁcity in the IEP concerning a reading program. The court wrote:
We can discern two key principles although schools should strive to base a
student’s specially designed instruction on peer-reviewed research to the
maximum extent possible, the student’s IEP team retains ﬂexibility to devise an
appropriate program, in the light of the available research.

12. No formal determination has been made by the PPT that Student had a learning
disability that would require IEP sewices. The Reading Specialist identiﬁed Student’s
problems and recommended that his current reading program continue with the addition
of Read Naturally.

13. The case ofLachman v. Illinois State Board ofEducation, 852 F. 2d 290, 1988—1989
EHLR Dec. 441:156 (71h Cir. 1988) addresses the issue of methodology:
Where parental preference for one particular methodology conﬂicts with
district’s proposed placement, court will not attempt to resolve question of
whether one educational methodology is better than another.

DISCUSSION

While the Student has been evaluated many times by many professionals, he has not had
a triennial evaluation, which was due in 2009. A comprehensive evaluation is needed to

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

determine whether to make changes in the IEP, The PPT must review the Student’s
records, including the various independent evaluations provided by Parents, and then
develop an appropriate triennial evaluation plan for Student The PPT may determine
what tests are needed and who should perform them. Given issues raised in this hearing,
it is suggested that in addition to Student’s primaiy disability of Autism, which is not in
dispute, the possibility of learning disabilities should be considered A reading
evaluation should also be considered. After the triennial has been completed, the PPT
will consider whether Student’s IBP needs modiﬁcation.

Reading instruction is given to all elementary school students. Some children have
problems learning to read, and they are screened by a reading specialist in this school
district. Suppott can be provided, tailored to the individual student’s needs, whether the
student has been identiﬁed as in need of special education or not. “Screening” available
to all students is not generally considered to trigger IDEA procedures. Parent was
notiﬁed when Read Naturally was recommended to address the Student’s ﬂuency
problem. (See M C., individually and on behalfofN. C, a child with a disability,
Plaintiffs, v. Kalonah/Lewisboro Union Free School District, Defendant, 58 IDELR 196
(US. District Court, Southern District of New York, 2012))

Student’s absences, late an‘ival at school on some days and early dismissals from school
at Parent request have reduced his educational opportunities. It is also noted that Parents
rejected after school homework support and ESY services that were offered to minimize
Student’s regression over summer vacation, Education is not a science and it is
impossible to identify causes and effects of progress or lack of progress by individual
students. However, experienced teachers’ suggestions concerning individual students are

woxthy of consideration.

The PPT has used data provided by Independent Psychologist A in lieu of other testing,
for which Parents withheld consent, as well as data from other independent evaluators.
PPT consideration of evaluations presented to the PPT by parents does not mean adoption
of all recommendations of the evaluator nor does it mean funding by the Board. Board
funding for independent evaluations is limited to a specific situation: when a Board
evaluation is challenged by parents, who request an independent evaluation at Board

expense.

The Board of Education’s legal authority to select and deploy members of the teaching
staff and paraprofessionals as well as contracted service providers is clear. The Board is
also responsible for supervising and providing specialized training when necessary to
ensure that Student’s IEP is properly implemented, Parental suggestions and complaints
should be considered by school administrators, but stafﬁng decisions remain the
prerogative of the Board.

The Board has responded to Parental concerns in several areas and has made reasonable
accommodations for Student. It is well established that Hearing Ofﬁcers do not meddle
with PPT decisions regarding educational methodologies. (Ridley School District v,
MR; J.R., Parent ofMinor Child E. R. v. Janet Cenmzme, 58 IDELR 271 (3’d Cir. 2012);

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0071

Lachman v. Illinois Stare Board ofEducalion, 1988—1989 EHLR Dec. 441:156 (7‘h Cir.
1988;

Each of the Board employees who had provided educational services to the Student and
testiﬁed in this hearing expressed affection for him and pleasure in his educational
progress. No credible evidence of acts of discrimination or retaliation was offered.

When Student moved from second to third grade in the fall of 2009, he also moved to a
different school. The problem of how the Contracted ABA Shadows would function
within the third grade classroom could have been avoided by having the Classroom
Teacher meet with the contracted ABA Shadows prior to the opening of school. An IEP
goal involving social skills may include some form of interaction with peers.

Parents frequently sent emails about matters they wished to have discussed at PPT
meetings immediately prior to scheduled meetings. This practice made it difﬁcult for
Board staff to review Parental concerns and questions prior to the meetings

The record includes copies of several forms sent to Parents, requesting permission to
make IEP modiﬁcations without calling a PPT meeting. Parents consented in some
cases, and refused consent in others, as is their right. Without such consent, the IEP

remained unchanged

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board provided a free appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive
environment to the Student in the 2009-2010 school year.

2. The Board provided FAPE in the least restrictive environment to the Student in the
2010-2011 school year.

3. N0 credible evidence was produced to support the Parents’ claims that Student’s IEP
had been changed outside the PPT process. Consent forms document changes approved

by Parents.

4. The Board was unable to complete a triennial evaluation due to Parents’ denial of
consent. Therefore, a triennial evaluation is ORDERED as outlined above.

5, N0 credible evidence was produced to support Parents’ claims that the Board and
school staff members discriminated or retaliated against the Parents and/or the Students

 

June 18, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0071

COMMENTS ON THE CONDUCT OF THE HEARING. PURSUANT TO
SECTION 10-7611-16 (b!

This has been a long hearing, both in the number of days of hearing (twelve) and the
times between hearing sessions. Hearing dates have been scheduled at the convenience
of the Parents, and there have been signiﬁcant intewals between hearing sessions to
accommodate the Parents. Those hearing dates that were postponed for good reasons
were postponed with the consent of both Parties and the Hearing Ofﬁcer.

An extraordinary amount of documentary evidence was offered in this hearing. Most of
the ﬁrst two days of hearing was spent on determining which documents would be
admitted. The Hearing Ofﬁcer’s classiﬁcation of documents to be admitted and those to
be excluded is attached as Appendix A to this decision. Documents excluded were
preserved with the record and are listed in Appendix B.

The Board’s copying on both sides of each page is appreciated.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer requested, in the September 29, 2011, pre—hearing conference
memorandum, that all witnesses appearing as professionals provide a resume. Several
witnesses were not instructed about this, and therefore it was difﬁcult to accurately
identify their professional roles, academic preparation and professional experience.

