December 15, 2011 Final Decision and Order 12—0161

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Greenwich Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler
Law Depaltment, Town of Greenwich

101 Field Point Rd., Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Whether the behavior that has resulted in the pending disciplinary action was caused by, or had a
direct and substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability; or if the conduct in question was
the direct result of the Board’s failure to implement the IEP.

SUMMARY:

This Student, who is eligible for special education and related sewices under the primary disability of
emotional disturbance, was expelled from the Board school due to an out of school arrest for sexual
assault based on a sexual encounter with another minor, three years his junior. A manifestation
determination meeting convened, and the Board staff agreed that the behavior resulting in the
disciplinary action was not caused by and did not have a direct and substantial relationship to the
Student’s disability and the conduct in question was not the direct result of the Board’s failure to
implement the IEP. The Parent requested this hearing, seeking an order to allow the Student to return to

school.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent requested this hearing on November 10, 2011. A prehearing conference convened on
November 15, 2011 and the hearing convened on December 8, 2011 within 20 school days of the ﬁling
of this request for hearing. A resolution session was convened on November 22, 201 1.

The Parent did not present any witnesses and did not submit any exhibits. She noted on the record that
she wanted the expulsion overturned and the Student returned to school. The Board’s sole witness was
Barbara Varanelli, administrator of the Board alternative school. The Board submitted exhibits B—l to

8—6.

December 15, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0161

This case proceeded as an expedited hearing. The hearing date waslconvened within 20 school days of
the request for hearing and this decision is issued within 10 school days of the closing of the evidentiary

hearing in accordance with 34 CFR §300.532(c).

T0 the extent that the procedural history, summary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
discussion/concluslons of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. v. Callallen

Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)

J URISIDICTION

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (“CGS”) §10—76h
and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in accordance with
the Uniform Administration Procedures Act (“UAPA”), CGS §§ 4-176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4—1 81a

and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:‘

1. The Student is currently 17 years old and was initially suspended and has been expelled from the
Board high school since last school year, subsequent to the manifestation determination PPT
meeting on May 24, 201 1. [Testimony Ms. Varanelli, Exhibit B-5] The Board reponed that the
expulsion hearing was reopened on December 2, 2011 to consider additional information.
[Record, submission by Board’s attorney, 1 1/23/11]

2. The Student is identiﬁed as eligible for special education and related sewices with the primary
disability of emotional disturbance. [Exhibit B—3]

3. The Student’s most recent psychological evaluation> completed by the Board school psychologist
in April 2010, describes the Student as having signiﬁcant and complex weaknesses in his
emotional functioning. While the Student’s greatest area of concern was found to be depression,
the report also noted that there are signiﬁcant attentional issues and impulsivity, as well as other
emotional issues present. The repott noted that the Student has difﬁculty in emotional regulation
and reportedly has poor self—control, changes moods quickly and can act out of control,
according to his parent. The report also noted that the Student had clinically signiﬁcant concerns
for social skills, leadership and functional communication, including concerns in the area of
appropriate conduct when interacting with others The BASC—2 responses also noted that he
does not work well under pressure, does not adjust well to new situations, loses his temper too
easily, acts out of control, is easily upset and has poor self—control, all areas recommended for
proactive interventions by the school psychologist. [Exhibit B-2] The IEPS submitted by the
Board do not reﬂect that the Board included appropriate interventions in the Student’s IEP as
recommended by the Board school psychologist.

4. While the conduct that was the subject of the disciplinary action reportedly occurred in January
2011, the Board failed to submit the IEP that was in place as an exhibit in this hearing. It was
repoﬁed, however, that the Student was failing all of his classes at that time, prior to his transfer
into the Arch program. [Testimony Ms. Varanelli]

 

December 15, 2011 Final Decision and Order 12-0161

10.

11.

At the PPT meeting of April 14, 201 1, the Student’s program was changed in that revisions were
made to the goals, and the Student’s program was changed to the Arch program, which is the
Board’s alternative school for students who are not successful at the high school. [Testimony
Ms. Varanelli, Exhibit B-3]

The Student was not successful when his program was changed to the Arch program, and shortly
after he was placed in the Arch program, another revision occurred in his IEP on May 16, 201 1.
The Board proposed changes to the goals and a modiﬁcation to the Student’s IEP without
convening a PPT. A notice was sent to the Parent for the May 16 amendment to the Student’s

IEP. [Exhibit B—4]

A manifestation determination PPT meeting convened on May 24, 2011. At that time, the Board
members of the PPT did not ﬁnd that the behavior was a manifestation of the Student’s
disabilityi [Testimony Ms. Varanelli; Exhibit B-S] In the worksheet for the manifestation
determination, the Board described the nature of the Student’s disability as “signiﬁcant concerns
for depressive symptomology, elevated scores of locus of control and a sense of inadequacy.”
The worksheet noted that there were charges of sexual assault pending and that the teacher’s
obsewations of the Student were that he was deﬁant, he was suspended for leaving school and he
doesn’t follow the rules. The Board staff noted on the worksheet that the Student does know the
difference between right and wrong as justiﬁcation for failing to ﬁnd a causal connection
between the behavior and the Student’s disability. [Exhibit B-l]

While the Board administrator testiﬁed that the IEP was reviewed at the manifestation
determination PPT meeting, the administrator referred to the May 16, 2011 IEP as the IEP that
was reviewed. The May 16 IEP was not the IEP that was in place at the time of the incident
resulting in the disciplinary action which occurred several months prior to the manifestation
review, and prior to the Student’s program revisions that occurred in the April and May 2011
versions of the Student’s IEP. [Testimony Ms. Varanelli; Exhibits B-l, B-4] Because the Board
failed to review the IEP that was in place at the time of the behavior which resulted in the
disciplinaty action, the Board did not appropriately complete the inquiry about whether the
conduct in question was the direct result of the Board’s failure to implement the IEP.

The behavior that was the result of the disciplinary action involved an arrest for consensual sex
that allegedly occurred outside of school between the Student and another student from the
Board schools who was three years younger than the Student. At the hearing, the behavior was
referred to as a sexual assault and also a sexual encounter. The charges subsequently were
dropped. [Testimony Ms. Varanelli]

While the Student was attending the Board’s alternative school, his behavior continued to be
problematic and consistent with the behaviors and emotional issues noted in the Student’s
evaluation. The Student had difﬁculty settling into the program, had poor self-control, wasn’t
compliant with the rules and had difﬁculty interacting with others. [Testimony Ms. Varanelli,

Exhibit B-2]

At the manifestation determination PPT meeting, the school based members of the team
concluded that the Student’s disability was not related to his misconduct, They also concluded

 

December 15, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0161

12.

13.

that the IEP was being implemented as discussed and written. [Testimony Ms. Varanelli, Exhibit
B— l , B—S]

The Student’s conduct in question, which is the subject of the disciplinary action and the
manifestation determination, relates to the Student’s disability. The Student is identiﬁed as
eligible for special education under the disability of emotional disturbance. Along with
depressive symptomology, the Student’s emotional disturbance disability includes additional
concerns of impulsivity, weaknesses in social skills, poor self—control, loss of temper and
concern in the area of interacting with others, as well as other emotional issues. His disability
had a direct and substantial relationship to the alleged misconduct which resulted in his
expulsion from the Board schools.

The Parent brought this hearing request to return the Student to school and, therefore, to
challenge this manifestation determination. [Exhibit H.O.—1]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 [IDEA] provides for

services to children with disabilities. The Student has been found eligible for special education services,

and is afforded the protections of the Act and related regulations.

The IDEA provides that prior to the change of placement of a child with a disability due to

violation of school rules, a manifestation determination must be completed. This provision provides

that:

“ . . . within 10 school days of any decision to change the
placement of a child with a disability because ofa violation
of a code of student conduct, the local educational agency,
the parent, and relevant members of the IEP Team (as determined
by the parent and the local educational agency) shall review all
relevant information in the student's ﬁle, including the child's IEP,
any teacher observations, and any relevant information provided
by the parents to determine -

(I) if the conduct in question was caused by, or had a

direct and substantial relationship to, the child's

disability; or

(II) if the conduct in question was the direct result of

the local educational agency‘s failure to implement the

IEP.” 20 U.S.C_ §1415

December 15, 201 I 1 Final Decision and Order 12-0161

If the LEA, the parents and the other members of the IEP team determine that either sub—clause is
applicable for the child, the conduct is determined to be a manifestation of the student’s disability. Id.

In this case, the Student’s behavior that has resulted in the disciplinary action was caused by, and
had a direct and substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability and was the disruptive behavior
characteristic of the Student’s disability.

This manifestation determination meeting failed in its inquiry as to whether the IEP was
implemented The Board used the incorrect IEP when making this analysis.

The manifestation determination meeting serves an important purpose. It is not a rubber stamp
of the disciplinary action taken by the Board. It must be a good faith inquiry into whether the behavior
was directly related to the Student’s disability and whether it directly related to the failure to implement
his IEP. That did not occur in this case.

The review of the eonduct in question and the Student’s disability necessitates the ﬁnding that
the behavior directly and substantially related to the Student’s disability. The manifestation review was
inappropriately narrow in this analysis as the Student’s disability of emotional disturbance manifests
itself in complex ways. The Board also failed to appropriately review whether the conduct related to
the Board’s failure to implement the IEP as the Board did not review the IEP that was in place at the
time of the incident, the one in place when the Student was failing every class and when the Student
allegedly participated in the behavior resulting in the Board’s discipline of the Student.

The behavior that has resulted in the disciplinary action was caused by, and did have a direct and
substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability. Fuithermore, the Board failed to appropriately

review whether the Student’s conduct was a direct result of the Board’s failure to implement the IEP.

 

December 15, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12—0161

The IDEA allows the hearing ofﬁcer broad discretion in providing appropriate relief in light of a
violation of IDEA. Burlington Sch. Comm. v. Mass. Dept. 0fEdua, 471 US. 358, , 556 IDELR 389
(1985)

The following relief, therefore, is hereby awarded:

1, The conclusion of the manifestation determination of May 24, 201 1 is hereby reversed.

2. The expulsion and suspension of the Student for the conduct in question are hereby
invalidated, and the Board shall correct the Student's records to note that the actions were a
manifestation ofhis disability.

3. An outside behavioral consultant shall develop an appropriate behavioral intervention plan for
the Student. An outside consultaht is necessary as the Board has demonstrated that, even with three
versions of the Student’s IEP during the last school year; it had been unable to appropriately address his
behavioral issues.

4. The Student shall be returned to his placement consistent with the current IEP of May 16,
201 l, or some other placement if the Patent and the Board so agree.

5. The Board is hereby ordered to pay the outside behavioral consultant to perform a thorough
functional behavioral assessment and to develop an appropriate behavioral intewention plan for the
student. The consultant shall also determine whether any other additional evaluations of the Student are
required, The procedure to be followed for selection of the consultant is as follows:

a. The Board’s attorney and the Parent shall immediately attempt to agree upon the identity of
the qualiﬁed Outside consultant. If they do agree, the patties should skip to subparagraph (1, with all
timefi'ames correspondingly reduced;

b. If the paities do not agree before January 3, 2012, as to who shall be the outside consultant,

the Parent may provide the names and addresses of three qualiﬁed consultants for the Board by the close

 

December 15, 201 1 ‘ Final Decision and Order 12-0161

of business on January 5, 2012. The Parent may contact the State Depanment of Education to obtain a
list of qualiﬁed consultants;

c. If the palties do not agree, the Board’s attorney shall notify the Parent on or before the close of
business on January 10, 2012 as to Which of the three consultants has been selected by the Board from
the list provided by the Parent;

d. Within two weeks of the receipt of the consultant's plan, the Student's IEP team shall convene
and adopt the behavioral intervention plan for the Student, unless the IEP team agrees otherwise. At the
same time, the Board shall conduct any additional evaluations found necessary by the consultant and
make any changes to the Student's 1131’ that may be necessary in accordance with the consultant’s
recommendations,

e. In making recommendations concerning the behavioral needs of the Student, the consultant
shall be permitted to make recommendations for other evaluations that the Student may need, and the
Board shall provide those additional evaluations of the Student.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The behavior that has resulted in the pending disciplinary action was caused by and did have a
direct and substantial relationship to, the Student’s disability.

2. The conclusion of the manifestation determination of May 24, 2011 is hereby reversed.

3. The expulsion and suspension of the Student for the conduct in question are hereby invalidated,
and the Board shall correct the Student's records to note that the actions were a manifestation of

his disability.

4. The Board is hereby ordered to pay a qualiﬁed outside consultant to perform a thorough
functional behavioral assessment and to develop an appropriate behavioral intervention plan for
the Student. The consultant shall also determine whether any other additional evaluations of the
Student are required. The procedure for selection of the consultant shall follow the process set
foﬁh in this hearing decision. The Board shall pay for any additional evaluations that the
consultant determines are necessary for the Student.

5. The Student shall be returned to his placement consistent with the current IEP of May 16, 201 1,
or some other placement if the Parent and the Board so agree.

