January 26‘ 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Newtown Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents, Pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board violated child ﬁnd in not evaluating the Student in all suspected areas
of disability in a timely manner;

2. Whether the program offered by the Board with the recommended placement at
Woodhouse Academy 01‘ Lorraine Di Foster Day for the 2011-12 school year is
appropriate and provides the Student with a free and appropriate public education in the
least restrictive environment;

3. It‘not, whether the Student requires a residential placement at Greenwood School for the
201 1—12 school year as requested by the Parent;

4. Whether the Board failed to complete the psychiatric evaluation by Dr. Gammon in a
timely manner;

5. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education
SUMMARY:

The 14 year old Student, identified as eligible for special education under the categoty of
emotional disturbance, has been receiving tutoring pending a placement decision The Board
offered a placement in a therapeutic day program. The Parents disagreed with this placement
offer and sought a residential placement for the Student at The Greenwood School in Vermont
Both the Board and Parents brought requests for hearing on the placement dispute. The Parents
also claimed the Board violated child ﬁnd in not evaluating the Student in all suspected areas of
disability in a timely manner and failed to complete the psychiatric evaluation in a timely
manner.

1

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0195

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board ﬁled its request for hearing (Case No. 12-0154) 011 October 26, 2011. [Exhibit 11.0.—
1] and a preheating conference convened on November 3, 2011, At the time of the prehearing
conference, the Parents were represented by counsel. Subsequently, counsel for the Parents
submitted notiﬁcation on November 14, 2011 that she was no longer representing the Parents
and that the Parents would be proceeding with the case pro se. In the email notiﬁcation, the
counsel noted that the Parents were planning to submit a request for hearing alleging violations
of child ﬁnd and other issues.

The hearing convened on December 1, 2011 at which time the Father indicated that he was
unaware of the December 1, 2011 hearing date and unprepared to go forward with the case on
that date. The matter was continued to the next scheduled hearing date of December 22, 201 1 to
allow the self-represented Parents time to prepare in light of the resignation of their counsel.

On or about December 5, 2011 the Parents submitted a request for hearing (Case No. 12-0195)
[Exhibit H.O,-5], which was assigned to Hearing Ofﬁcer Rosado. A request to consolidate the
cases was granted, and issues from both cases were consolidated into this case. Both parties
waived the resolution session for Case No 12-0195, and the hearing convened on December 22,
2011 and January 5, 2012. A request for extension of the mailing date of the decision was
granted to allow the self—represented Parents and the Board’s attorney to submit closing
argument. Written closing arguments were submitted by both parties on January 13, 2012.

The Board’s witnesses were Christine Kirschenbaum, assistant director of Lorraine Di Foster
Day School (“Assistant Director LDFD”); Robert Rosseau, school psychologist; Dr. George
David Gammon, psychiatrist and Michael Regan, Board director of pupil services (“Director”).

The Parents’ witnesses were Dr. Marc Gershowitz, psychologist and the Father.

The Parents submitted exhibits numbered Pvl t0 P—32. Objections to Exhibits P—20 and P-22
through P-29 were sustained. The remaining Parents exhibits were entered as full exhibits.

The Board submitted exhibits numbered B-l to B-95, which were entered as full exhibits.

A11 exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision

T0 the extent that the procedural history, sunnnary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. v. Caliallen
independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993)

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticul General Statutes
(“CGS”) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related

2

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195

regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedures Act (“UAPA”),
CGS §§ 4-176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4~186.

FINDINGS OF FACTS:

1.

10.

11.

The Student is 14 years old and is currently receiving tutoring as his educational program
with the agreement and at the request of the Parents. [Testimony Director]

It is undisputed that the Student is currently eligible for special education and related
services.

The Student was eligible for special education services in his early school years for
speech articulation errors that interfered with his communication with peers and adults.
At that time, the Student was attending a private school, and received speech services
from the Board. [Exhibit 13-4]

Subsequently, the Student enrolled in the Board schools and was eligible for special
education with the primary disability of speech/language impaired. He continued to be
eligible for special education during the 2003-04 and 2004-05 school years. [Exhibit B-
13]

111 May 2005, at the end of second grade, the Student was exiled from special education
with the agreement of the Parents. [Exhibits B-30]

In grades three, four, ﬁve and six, the Student made excellent progress in his grades and
achieved goal 01‘ advanced on his Connecticut Mastery Test (“CMT”), with the exception
of one score oi‘proﬂeient 011 the writing results. [Testimony Director; Exhibits B—32 to B—
37]

The Student’s CMT results improved in sixth grade, when the Student achieved goal or
advanced in all areas [Exhibit 13-38] In sixth grade, the Student continued to make
excellent progress as evidenced by his excellent grades and favorable comments by his
teachers on his report card. [Exhibit B—39]

1n seventh grade, the Student’s grades plummeted at the end 01‘ the second marking
period. [Exhibit B—40]

The Father submitted a message to the Board on February 9, 2010 requesting psycho-
educational testing 01‘ the Student. [Exhibit B-41]

A notice of a Planning and Placement Team [PPT] meeting was sent to the Parents on
February 17, 2010 scheduling the PPT meeting for February 26, 2010‘ [Exhibit B—42]

At this time, the Student was administered the Connecticut Mastery Test, and achieved
advanced in mathematics and reading, and goal in writing. [Exhibit B-43]

January 26, 2012 F inal Decision and Order 12-0195

12.

131

14.

15.

16.

17.

I8.

19.

The PP'I‘ was rescheduled to March 4, 2010 due to a school cance11ation for a snow day
for the previously scheduled meeting date. [Testimony School Psychologist; Exhibits B—
44, B—46]

As of the time of the PPT, the Student’s attendance was not an issue; subsequent to this
PPT his attendance began to be problematic. [Testimony School Psychologist]

The PPT convened on March 4, 2010. The sehool-based members of the PPT discussed
concerns of work completion, but were impressed with the Student’s skills and
capabilities. [Testimony School Psychologist] The members of the PPT discussed a plan
to have the Student undergo comprehensive testing. The Father did not agree or disagree
with the evaluation proposed, but instead said he would take the consent form home for
consideration. [Testimony School Psychologist; Exhibits B-46, B—47]

The Board recommended intelligence/cognition and social-emotional testing by the
school psychologist, academic achievement testing by the special education teacher, a
behavior observation by the pupil services/special education staff and a developmental
history by the social worker. [Exhibit B—47]

On March 9, 2010 the Father signed an altered consent form, whiting out several 01‘ the
testing areas, and agreeing only to portions of the testing requested by the Board. The
Father agreed to intelligence/eognition testing by the school psychologist, academic
achievement testing by the special education teacher, a behavior observation by the pupil
services/special education staff and a developmental history by the social worker. He
would not consent to social-emotional testing by the school psychologist. In his
correspondence to the Board, the Father reported that Marc Gershowitz, PhD. was
completing rating scales, an interview and projectives which shouldn’t be duplicated.
[Testimony Director; Exhibit B-47]

The Director contacted the Parents about the altered consent form, as the school-based
members of the PPT wanted to evaluate all areas of suspected disability The Director
spoke with the Father and requested that the Board be provided with a copy 01‘ the
evaluation by Dr. Gershowitz. Ii‘the Board determined that the evaluation was adequate,
then the Board would complete the other portions of the evaluation. The Parents agreed
to get a copy of the report to the Board, so that the Board could review it and ensure that
they did not overlap or repeat any testing completed by Dr. Gershowitz. [Testimony
Director]

In March, the Director spoke with Dr. Gershowitz about the status of his evaluation ofthe
Student. Dr. Gershowitz didn’t give the Director any details of his ﬁndings, but said that
the evaluation process was complete. The report was not written at this time, The
Director was under the impression at this time that the Board would be provided the
written evaluation report in about a week. ['l'estimony Director]

The School Psychologist did not proceed with paitial testing during the spring 2010, as
he was awaiting results of the Student’s private evaluation by Dr. Gershowitz so that he
could then proceed with the school’s portions of the evaluation. [Testimony School
Psychologist]

4

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195

20.

21,

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

During this time, the Student was missing a considerable amount of school, either absent
or tardy on many days. The Parents reported that the Student would not get out of bed to
come to school on some of these days. [Testimony School Psychologist] The Board staff
followed up with the family regarding the attendance issue. [Exhibit B-49] In mid April
2010, the Board conducted a home visit with the guidance counselor and the school
social worker visiting the home on one of the days in which the Student failed to come to
school. The Father was present at the time, but the Student was not home. The Father
told the Board staff that the Student was a mess, it was difficult to wake him up to go to
school and that the Student refuses to go to school. The Father reported that some of his
repeated tardies occurred when the Father awakens at 1 1 am. to ﬁnd that the Student had
not gone to school. When that happened the Father drove him to school. At this home
visit, the Board staff again requested a copy of Dr. Gershowitz’s evaluation, as the Board
needed this information to go forward with its evaluation. [Testimony Director; Exhibit
B-48]

At this time the Board staff repeatedly stated that they were awaiting the private
psychological evaluation before they completed their testing. Although the Father signed
consent on May 17, 2010, Dr. Gershowitz’s evaluation was not shared with the Board by
the end of the school year. [Testimony Director; Exhibit B-48, B-SO, P-9]

The Parent had requested that the Board submit their dispute to mediation in spring 2010,
but the Board did not agree to mediation at that time. [Testimony Director; Exhibit P—S]

At the end of the 4“1 marking period, the Student had received grades of F in English 7,
D-/F in Math a D in science and an F in social studies. During the 2009-10 school year
he was absent 26 days and tardy 22 days. [Exhibit 13—5 1] The Student was retained in
seventh grade for the 2010—1 1 school year. [Testimony School Psychologist]

On August 2, 2010, the Parents submitted a request for “emergency arbitration” to the
Board. [Testimony Director; Exhibit 13-52}

The Director responded to the Parents, requesting that the Parents provide the Board with
the written permission to conduct the recommended evaluation and a copy of Dr.
Gershowitz’s evaluation. The Director also indicated in this correspondence that the
Board would agree to mediate this matter. [Testimony Director; Exhibit B-53]

The Parents followed up with the Board with a letter on August 30, requesting
“emergency arbitration whatever you call the next level in due process.” [Exhibit 13—54]

The Board’s attorney forwarded this request to the state Due Process Unit, stating that it
appeared that the Parents wish to request a due process hearing, but that the Parents
declined to complete the form for requesting a due process hearing [Exhibit B-54]

That hearing request received by the Board on September 1, 2010 was assigned to
Hearing Ofﬁcer Geltinan, who convened a preheating conference on October 7, 2010 and

scheduled the matter for hearing on November 18, 201 1 . At the preheating conference,

5

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0195

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Hearing Ofﬁcer Gelfmau noted that the request was insufficient, and counsel for the
Parents agreed to submit a revised request for hearing. [Exhibit B-56]

The parties mediated that case, and because there was no revised request for hearing
submitted after a sufﬁciency challenge, the case was dismissed without prejudice on
November 12, 2010. [Testimony Director; Final Decision, Case 110. 11-0107]

At the beginning of the 2010-11 school year, the Student was repeating seventh grade and
continued to have frequent absences and tardies. [Testimony Father; Exhibit B—61]

In November 2010 the Board agreed to go forward with its evaluation as an
accommodation to the Parents with the agreement that Dr. Gershowitz’s evaluation
would be provided to the Board as soon as it was available. [Testimony Director, Exhibit
B-64]

The Parents’ attorneys’ ofﬁce sent notiﬁcation that they were going to receive Dr.
Gershowitz’s evaluation report on January 3, 201 1, and that they would forward it to the
Board so a PPT meeting could be scheduled. [Exhibit 3—66] Dr. Gershowitz conducted
the evaluation of the Student on four days from February to May 2010, but his report of
the evaluation dated December 15, 2010 was not shared with the Board until the end of
January 201 l , [Exhibit B-69]

The Board conducted an educational assessment ot‘the Student on January 6, 201 1. 1n
the results of the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test (WlAT) the Student scored in
the high average to superior range for all of the testing, with superior in word reading and
in his total reading composite. The Student scored average on the reading ﬂuency
portion of the Woodcock Johnson 111 Achievement Battery and superior in the writing
ﬂuency. [Exhibit B—67]

The school psychologist conducted a psychological evaluation of the Student on January
11, 201 1. The WISC-lV eomposite/index score results were verbal comprehension 1 19,
perceptual reasoning 1 15, working memory 104 and processing speed, 115. His full scale
1Q was 119. The Student was given selected poltions of the Woodcock Johnson Tests of
Cognitive Ability ~ Third Edition in order to further delve into his processing skills.
While the short term memory testing during the evaluation conducted by the school
psychologist did not substantiate a substantial weakness in short term memory, prior
testing completed by the Board in 2004 had a single lower index score in the area 01‘
working memory The school psychologist explained that this was thought to be an
aberration given the results of all the testing analyzed. [Testimony School Psychologist;
Exhibits B—19, B-20, 8-21, 8-22, B~23. 8-68]

On January 26, 201 1, the Parents‘ attorney provided the Board’s attorney with a copy of
Dr. Gershowitz’s evaluation of the Student. [Exhibit B-69j

Dr. Gershowitz agreed that the Student exhibited symptoms of anxiety disorder and

depression, but stated that these symptoms were situational. [Testimony Dr. Gershowitz]

Dr. Gershowitz testiﬁed that he had could not diagnose a learning disability, but then

inexplicably concluded that the Student’s issues were related to a learning disability, He
6

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0195

37.

38,

39,

40.

41,

42.

43.

also performed assessments on the Student using outdated assessment measures, and
while he evaluated the Student in the spring 2010, he failed to draft a report until
December 2010, which was not shared with the Board until the end of January 201 1. Dr.
Gershowitz’s evaluation also failed to identify any diagnosis for the Student. [Testimony
Dr. Gershowitz, Dr. Gammon, Director, School Psychologist] Dr. Gershowitz’s
testimony about the Student and his evaluation report were unclear and evasive. The
testimony and repoﬁ were of little assistance in understanding the Student and his needs.

Dr. Gershowitz’s evaluation provided the PPT with minimal information about the
Student. The Student was described as a person who magniﬁes others’ displeasure with
him, and who might over react or retreat as a result of that. [Testimony School
Psychologist, Exhibit B—69] D1: Gershowitz’s evaluation, however, was inconclusive
about the Student’s emotional issues and whether he met the requirements for eligibility
as a student with an emotional disturbance. This led the Board to recommend that the
Student undergo a psychiatric evaluation. [Testimony Dr. Gershowitz, Director]

The PPT convened to discuss the evaluations on the mutually agreed upon date of
February 25, 2011. [Exhibits B—70-72, B—92]

At the February 25, 201 1 PPT meeting all members ol‘the team agreed that the Student
would undergo an evaluation by a mutually agreed upon psychiatrist, [Testimony
Director; Exhibits B—74, B—92]

On March 17, 201 1 the Parents’ attorney reported to the Board that Dr. Gammon would
be the mutually agreed upon evaluator to conduct the psychiatric evaluation of the
Student. [Testimony Director; Exhibit B—75] The Student’s records were forwarded to
Dr. Gammon on March 25. [Testimony Director; Exhibit B—76]

Dr. Gammon is an experienced psychiatrist and is board certified in pediatric and
adolescent psychiatry. He is an assistant clinical professor at the Yale Child Study
Center, who also has a private practice. [Testimony Dr. Gammon] Dr, Gammon’s
testimony, as well as his report were informative, thoughtful, insightful and of much
assistance in the understanding of the Student and his needs.

Dr. Gammon conducted his evaluation on April 30, 201 1, but due to intervening medical
issues of the psychiatrist, the evaluation was not completed and faxed to the Board until
August 4, 2011. In the intervening months, the Board actively pursued obtaining the
evaluation from Dr. Gammon. [Testimony Director, Dr. Gammon; Exhibits B~77 to B—
79] The delay due to the psychiatrist’s medical issues was an unfortunate occurrence but
not due in any part to the action or inaction ol‘the Board.

Dr. Gammon’s evaluation concluded that the Student diagnoses in Axis I were mood
disorder, NOS and anxiety disorder NOS. The psychiatrist noted that the Student felt
apprehensive and demoralized, which resulted in his school avoidance. The psychiatrist
recommended that the Student be found eligible for special education under the category
01‘ emotional disturbance based on the results of the evaluation in conjunction with the
Student’s school difﬁculties. He also suggested that a further neuropsychological

7

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 120195

44.

45.

461

47‘

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

evaluation could be conducted of the Student to rule out cognitive disorder, NOS.
[Testimony Dr. Gammon, Exhibit B-77]

Dr. Gammon is familiar with Lon‘aine D. Foster Day School and concluded that this
would be an excellent environment for the Student, consistent with his reconunendation
in his report. He also recommended in his report that a neuropsychological evaluation
could be completed in conjunction with this placement of the Student. [Testimony Dr.
Gammon, Exhibit B-77]

Prior to the PPT convening to discuss Dr. Gammon’s evaluation, the Board’s attorney
requested that the Pat'ents’ attorney have the Parents sign the release which would allow
the Board to send records to two possible out ol‘distt‘ict placements so that it could be
determined whether the Student would be an appropriate candidate for placement at the
school. [Testimony Director; Exhibit B—80]

On August 22, 201 l a Notice of PPT meeting was sent to all members of the PPT,
scheduling the meeting for August 30, 201 1. Due to massive power outages throughout
the area due to the hurricane/tropical storm, the Board ofﬁces were without power and
the PPT meeting had to be rescheduled. [Testimony Director; Exhibits B-81 t0 B—84l

The Student’s evaluations were forwarded to Lorraine D. Foster Day School with the
consent of the Parents in application for an out ofdistrict placement for the Student.
[Testimony Director; Exhibits B—86, B—87]

The PPT meeting cancelled due to the power outages was rescheduled, and on September
15, 2011, the PPT convened. [Testimony School Psychologist, Director; Exhibit B—88]

The School Psychologist noted that the PPT members learned that the Student had two
diagnoses (mood disorder, NOS and anxiety disorder, NOS) and has developed patterns
of avoidance from the evaluation completed by Dr. Gammon Dr. Gammon
recommended that the Student be enrolled in a program with staff experienced in dealing
with emotional difﬁculties. [Testimony School Psychologist]

The members ofthe PPT agreed that the Student qualiﬁed for special education, under
the category of emotional disturbance. [Testimony Director, School Psychologist, Exhibit
13-88] There was no dispute from any person at the PPT meeting, including the Parents
and their attorney, as to this eligibility determination. [Testimony Director]

The PPT developed an IEP for the Student, with goals including developing coping skills,
completion of academic work and developing self—advocacy, all goals appropriate to meet
the needs ol‘the Student as identiﬁed in the evaluations. [Testimony School Psychologist,
Director; Exhibit B—88]

The Board recommended that the Student be placed at an out ol‘district day placement at
a therapeutic program at Woodhouse Academy 01' Lorraine D. Foster Day School,
recommendations that were consistent with Dr, Gammon’s recommendations for the
Student. [Testimony School Psychologist; Exhibit B88]

8

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195

53.

54‘

55.

56.

57.

58.

The Parents refused the placement, requesting a residential placement at Greenwood
Sehooi in Putney, Vermont. [Testimony Father, Director; Exhibit B-88] Greenwood
School is described as a boarding and day school for boys who have been diagnosed with
dyslexia, speciﬁc learning disabilities, receptive/expressive language deﬁcits, executive
functioning deﬁcits, ADD/ADHD, disorders of written expression, dysgi'aphia or
speech/language needs. It is not a therapeutic program addressing needs of those who
have emotional issues. [Exhibit P—14]

The Board agreed to the Parents’ request that the Student would receive tutoring as a
temporary program while the determination of his placement is made. [Testimony
Director; Exhibit B—88]

The Student’s application was reviewed by Lorraine D. Foster Day School staff, who felt
that the Student looked like a very appropriate candidate for their program based on their
review of his records. This school would be an excelient ﬁt for the Student as it has been
successful with similar students who have issues of attendance, anxiety and depression.
The program at the school is set up so that every aspect of the program is therapeutic,
able to respond immediately to issues that are difﬁcult for the Student. The program is a
state approved, follows state standards, and has certiﬁed special education teachers
teaching the classes. This school has two possible classrooms that could be a ﬁt for the
Student. [Testimony Assistant Director LDFD, Director]

The Parents initially did not give consent to place the Student in special education. On
October 19, 2011 the Board was provided a copy of the Parents’ consent to initial
placement in special education. In this consent, the Parents agreed to placement in
special education, but did not agree to the Board’s proposed out of district placement.
[Testimony Director; Exhibit B—89, B~90J

Pending the placement decision, the Student has been receiving tutoring as his
educational program, at the request of the Parents. The Student receives instruction from
Excel Tutoring at their ofﬁces. [Testimony Director, School Psychologist]

The Student has been receiving 10 hours per week oftutoring at the tutoring sewiee
ofﬁce for the 2011—12 school year in four subject areas: English, history, mathematics
and science. He has made good progress in his tutoring program, and is considered a
bright and motivated student. [Testimony Director; Exhibit B—93]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Parent and Board brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with

Disabilities Education Act [iDEAJ which provides for special education and related services to

children with disabilities, from birth through age 21, Students who are identified as eligible for

special education are entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”)

9

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195

pursuant to state and federal laws. & Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 10—76 er. xeq.; the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA), 20 U,S.C. § 1401, et seq.

A local education agency has a “Child Find” obligation under IDEA, which is a duty to
identify, locate and evaluate children who have a disability or who are suspected of having a
disability. A.P. v. Woodstock Board of Education, 572 F. Supp. 2d 221, 50 IDELR 275 (D.Gonn.
2008), citing 20 U.S.C. §1412(a)(4)(A) Students who are suspected ofhaving a disability and
who are in need ot‘special education and related services are referred to a planning and
placement team (PPT), which plans for an evaluation to determine whether the Student is a child
with a disability under the IDEA. Id.

There was no child ﬁnd violation in this case. For much ofthe Student’s academic career
he was proceeding well, achieving excellent grades and performing well on the CMTs. There
was no reason to suspect that the Student had a learning disability prior to the Parents’ referral in
February 2010. When the Parents requested an evaluation as the Student’s academic
performance began to falter, the Board took the appropriate action to evaluate the Student for
special education. In this case the Parents failed to provide appropriate consent to the request to
evaluate, thereby thwarting the Board’s ability to proceed with a comprehensive evaluation of
the Student. The Parents’ failure to consent to the evaluation plan designed by the Board
prevented the Board from conducting its evaluation and determining eligibility for special
education The Board took all reasonable efforts to obtain a copy of the Parents’ private
evaluation so that it could review the evaluation and go forward with its portions of the
evaluation. Subsequently, when the mutually agreed upon psychiatrist evaluated the Student, the
delay in the evaluation report was not due to any actions by the Board, but an unfortunate

medical situation involving the mutually agreed upon psychiatric evaluator.

10

 

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0195

All parties then agreed that the Student was eligible for special education under the
categmy of emotional disturbance That criteria is:

"a condition exhibiting one or more oflhe/bllowing clmracrerisfics over a
long period qfrime and lo a marked degree that adversely qffecls a child ‘3
educational pelffornmnce.‘

(A ) an inability Io learn that cannol be explained by imelleclual, sensory
or healthﬁlclors,

(B) An inability to build or maintain S(l/I‘Q‘ﬂlclolty interpersonal
relationships with peers and teachers.

(C) Intwpl'opl'iale types afbehavior arfeelings under normal
circumstances,

(D) A general pervasive mood ofzmhappiness 0r depresxion,

(E) A tendency to develop physical symptoms orfears associated with
personal or school problems.

The Student did have a general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression over a long
period of time to a marked degree that did adversely affect his educational performance. He also
suffered from fears and anxiety about school{ He was suffering from anxiety and depression as
noted by the independent evaluator. His treating psychologist conﬁrmed that the Student was
exhibiting symptoms ofanxiety and depression, although he was ﬁxated on a determination of
the causation ofthese symptoms. The Student was appropriately found eligible for special
education under the category of emotional disturbance.

After determining the Student’s eligibility for special education, the Board offered the
Student an IEP, which included placement in a therapeutic day program, based on the
recommendation of the mutually agreed upon psychiatrist who completed a comprehensive
evaluation ol'thc Student.

The standard for determining whether a free appropriate public education [FAPE] has

been provided is set forth in Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District

v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176 (1982). The two-pronged inquiry set forth in Rowley asks ﬁrst whether

 

 

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195
the procedural requirements of IDEA have been reasonably met and, second, whether the IEP is
“reasonably qalculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁts.” I_d_. at 206-207

Nothing in the record supp01ts the conclusion that there were any procedural Violations
which resulted in a denial of FAPE to the Student

The second prong of Rowley is the determination of whether the Board offered the
Student an appropriate IEP. The proper gauge for determining the IEP is substantively
appropriate is the question of “whether the educational program provided for a child is
reasonably calculated to allow the child to receive ‘meaningful’ educational beneﬁtsi" Mrs. B. v.
Milford Board ofEducation, 103 F.3d 11 14, 1 120 (2nd Cir. 1997). Meaningful educational
beneﬁts are “not everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents,” Tucker v. Bay
Shore Union Free School Dist., 873 F.2d 563, 567 (2nd Cir, 1989). Rather, school districts are
required to provide a “‘basic ﬂoor of oppoﬁunity’ . . . [by providing] access to specialized
sewices which are individually designed to provide educational beneﬁt to the handicapped
child.” Mex, w, 458 US. at 201; a £32 KP. v. Juzwic, 891 F, Supp. 703, 718 (D.C0nn.
1995) (the goal of the IDEA is to provide access to public education for disabled students, not to
maximize a disabled child’s potential)

The Board’s proposed IEP for the Student provides the appropriate suppoﬂs and services
to enable the Student to obtain educational beneﬁt in a state approved therapeutic day program.
Because the IEP offers an appropriate program in the least restrictive environment, the Parents
are not entitled to their requested placement as the IDEA “does not require [a local educational
agency] to pay for the cost of education, including special education and related services, of a
child with a disability at a private school or facility if that agency made FAPE available 10 the

child and the parents elected to place (he child in a private schoolﬂwilily." 34 C.F.R. §

12

 

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0195
300.403(a) (emphasis added); see also M.C. ex rel. Mrs. C. v. Voluntowh Bd. of Ed., 226 F. 3d
60, 66 (2d Cir. 2000)‘

The Board has developed and offered an appropriate IEP for the Student for the 201 1-12
school year. Therefore, the Parents’ request for placement at Greenwood Academy must be
denied.

The hearing ofﬁcer has authority to order independent evaluations as part 0121 hearing
order. Regs. Conn. Agencies § 10-76d—9(c)(4) The psychiatrist had the beneﬁt 01‘ reviewing all
the evaluations completed of the Student but nevertheless recommended that the Student undergo
a neuropsychological evaluation In conjunction with the placement at the therapeutic day
program the Board shall also provide a neuropsychological assessment of the Student to rule out
a cognitive disorder as recommended by the psychiatrist’s evaluation and to better understand
the Student’s possible weaknesses noted in previous evaluations.

The criteria for selection ofthe neuropsychologist to conduct the evaluation, including
the location of the evaluation and the qualiﬁcations of the examiner, shall be the same as the
criteria which the board 01‘ education uses when it initiates an evaluation. The Board shall have
Dr. Gammon provide a list of three neuropsychologists who meet the criteria for the conducting
01‘ the evaluation, and the Parents shall select one of the nem‘opsyehologists to conduct the
evaluation from Dr. Gammon’s list. The Parents shall fully cooperate in making the Student
available for the neuropsychological evaluation.

The placement ofthe Student at the therapeutic day school shall not be delayed pending

the evaluation.

1 Only if it is concluded that the IEP is procedurally or substantively deﬁcient must we reach the ﬁnal step and ask
whether the Parents‘ placement is appropriate to meet the needs of the Student, A.C. and MC. v, Board of
Education ot‘Chappaqua Central School District 553 F. 3d 165, 51 IDBLR 147 (2"Ll Cir. 2009)

13

 

January 26, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0195

The neuropsychological evaluation report shall identify any recommended changes or
additions to the Student’s goals and objectives to address any identiﬁed weaknesses, and the PPT

shall convene to implement any such recommended changes/additions t0 the Student’s IEP.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

. The Board did not violate child ﬁnd because it did not fail to timely evaluate the Student
in all areas of suspected disability.

2‘ The Board proposed program with the recommended placement of the Student at a
therapeutic day school for the 201 1—12 school year is appropriate and provides the Student
with FAPE in the least restrictive enviromnent.

3. The Board’s recommended placement at Lorraine D. Foster Day School is appropriate,
and the Student shall be placed at Lorraine D. Foster Day School il‘ the ﬁnal determination
of Lorraine Di Foster Day School is that an appropriate place is available for the Student.

4. If Lorraine D. Foster Day School does not have an appropriate place for the Student, the
Student shall be placed as a day student at Grove School in Madison, Connecticut.

5. Ifneither Lorraine D. Foster Day School or Grove School has a placement available for
the Student, the Student shall be placed in another state approved therapeutic day school

which has similar proﬁle to Lorraine D. Foster Day School or the Grove School.

6. As the Board’s program is found to be appropriate, it is not necessary to determine the
appropriateness, or lack thereof, of the Parents’ requested placement.

7. The Student does not require a residential placement to receive a free appropriate public
education.

8. The Board completed the Student’s psychiatric evaluation in a timely manner.
9. The Student is not entitled to compensatory education.

10. The Student shall be provided a netu‘opsychological evaluation as outlined in this
decision.

14

