June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Fairﬁeld Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Lawrence W. Berliner
Law Ofﬁce of Lawrence Berliner LLC
1720 Post Road East, Suite 214E
Westport, CT 06880

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim,
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Whether the Board’s triennial evaluation of the Student is appropriate.

SUMMARY:

The Board conducted a triennial reevaluation of the Student, which was reviewed at a
Flaming and Placement Team (PPT) meeting in February 2011. One year after the triennial
reevaluation was reviewed at the PPT meeting the Parents requested an independent educational
evaluation (IEE) 0f the Student during a PPT meeting. The Board brought this action to defend
the appropriateness of its triennial reevaluation.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parents received this request for hearing on February 27, 2012 [H.O.—1] and preheating
conferences convened on March 5 and 9, 2012. Requests for extensions of the mailing date of
the decision were granted to allow for scheduling of additional hearing dates at the request of the
attorneys for both parties.

The hearing convened on four hearing dates: April 26, May 29, June 11 and June 26, 2011 and
closing argument was presented by both parties on the last day of hearing.

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0309

The Board’s witnesses were Walter Young, Board school psychologist; Linda Bucci, Board
speech/language pathologist [SLP]; Peggy DeMaria, retired Board language arts consultant [LA
Consultant] and Kimberly Mullen, Board special education teacher [Special Education Teacher].

The Parents” witnesses were the Grandmother, the Mother, the Father and Dr. Sherrill Werblood,
psychologist.

The Board submitted Exhibits B-l through B-99. All of the Board’s exhibits were entered as
full exhibits.

The Parents submitted Exhibits P—l through P—20. The Parents withdrew Exhibits P-6 and P—18.
The Board’s objection to Exhibit P-19 was sustained. At the close of the hearing, the Board’s
objection to Exhibit P-20 was pending. The Parents’ attorney had been instmcted that any
outstanding objections to exhibits would be sustained if the relevancy of the document was not
established. Therefore, the objection to Exhibit P—20 was sustained The remaining Parents’
exhibits were entered as full exhibits.

A11 exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision.

T0 the extent that the procedural history, summaiy and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann P. v. Callallen
Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD Text 1993)

STATEMENT OF J URIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. §10-76h and
related regulations, 20 U.S.C. §1415(f) and related regulations, and in accordance with the
Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, Conn. Gen. Stat §§ 4-176e t0 4-178, inclusive, §§4-
181a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF F ACT:

1. The Student is 14 years old and has attended the Board schools since age 3, with the
exception of time during 2006 and 2007 when she attended schools in Florida and in
Westpoﬁ. [Exhibit B-55]

2. It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education under the primary
disability of Other Health Impairment. [Exhibit B—97] The Student was diagnosed with
Prader-Willi Syndrome at bilth, which is related to a genetic error involving chromosome
15. Consistent with this diagnosis, the Student’s speech and motor milestones were
impacted and delayed relative to normal limits. Also related to PradenWilli Syndrome,
the Student’s history indicates she experiences an increased appetite and low metabolism,

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0309

which requires monitoring of her food intake and physical activity to promote health.
[Exhibit B—79]

_ The Board has conducted evaluations of the Student during the 1999-2000 school year,
the 2001~02 school year, the 2004—05 school year, 2006-07 school year, 2007—08 school
year and the Parents have participated in the PPT meetings which have planned and
reviewed evaluations. [Exhibits B-4, B-12, B-33, B—34, B-38, B-39, B-49, B-SO, B—51,
B-52, B-56, B-57, B—58, B-59, B-60, B—62, B—64]

. The PPT convened on February 11, 2010 to conduct an annual review, developan
Individualized Education Program (IEP) and plan the Student’s triennial reevaluation.
[Exhibit 8—72]

The Mother signed the Notice and Consent to Conduct a Reevaluation 0n Febmary 11,
2010, agreeing to the following test/eva1uation procedures: individual cognitive test of
cognitive ability, behavior checklist of behavior/social/emotional, individual achievement
of academic achievement, individually administered tests of receptive and expressive
language, information assessment of social communication and projective testing of
personality. The evaluators listed on the consent form were the school psychologist, the
speech language pathologist [SLP], the language arts specialist and the special education
teacher. [Testimony Mother; Exhibit B-83, page 29]

The language arts evaluation was conducted on December 1, 2010 by the Board language
arts consultant. The consultant administered two norm-referenced tests in her evaluation,
the Woodcock Reading Mastery Test-Revised [WRMT—R] and the Test of Written
Language w 4 [TOWL-4]. In the WRMT-R, the Student’s standard score in word
identiﬁcation was 93, her word comprehension standard score was 82, her passage
comprehension standard score was 75 and her total reading score was 86. The Student’s
score in word identiﬁcation was in the average range, the word comprehension was in the
below average range and the passage comprehension was in the well below average
range. Her total reading score was within the average range The Student’s standard
scores from the TOWL-4 were a 75 on the contrived writing and an 84 on the
spontaneous writing with an overall writing standard score of 76, in the poor range. The
tests were conducted in accordance with the publisher’s instructions and the consultant
was appropriately trained to administer and interpret the results. The consultant
identiﬁed recommendations based on her evaluation, which were shared in the PPT
meeting and listed at the conclusion of her written evaluation. [Testimony LA Consultant,
Exhibit B—72]

. The Student’s triennial reevaluation also included a speech and language evaluation. A
hearing screening was conducted in which the Student passed a hearing screening
bilaterally. An obsewation was completed of the Student in her reading class, and the
evaluator considered teachers’ reports in her evaluation. [Testimony SLP, Exhibit B-8]

. The SLP administered three tests as part of the speech/language evaluation, the Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals — 4 (CELF-4), the Peabody Picture Vocabulary

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

10.

11.

12.

Test-4 (PPVT—4) and the Word Test-2 Adolescent. The results of the CELF-4 found the
Student’s overall general language skills to be below the average. She received a core
language score of 66 and her overall receptive language skills also fell be10w the average
range with a receptive language index of 66. Her expressive language index fell below
the average range with a standard score of 66, her language content index score of 67 was
below the average range and her language memory index was below the average range at
a standard score of 62. The Student’s standard score on the Word Test-2 Adolescent was
a total test score of 66, below the average range. In the PPVT-4, the Student was
assessed a single word receptive vocabulary test and earned a standard score of 95, within
the average range. [Testimony SLP, Exhibit B-8]

The SLP concluded that the Student’s signiﬁcant needs in the areas of receptive,
expressive and pragmatic language impact her ability to access the general education
curriculum without specialized instruction and supports. The SLP used technically sound
measurements which yielded accurate information about the Student. The SLP shared
the recommendations in her report and with the PPT when it convened to discuss the
triennial i'eeva1uation. [Testimony SLP, Exhibit B—8]

Kimberly Mullen, a board special education teacher, administered the Key Math
assessment as pait of the triennial evaluation. The results of the Key Math assessment
were a standard score of 77 in basic concepts, a standard score of 92 in operations, a
standard score of 81 for applications and a total test composite standard score of 81. The
scores in basic concepts, applications and in the total test composite were below average,
and the operations score was within the average range. The Key Math assessment was
selected as it is a comprehensive math assessment that provides detailed information in a
Variety of areas of math and was an appropriate instrument to obtain information about
the Student’s strengths and weaknesses. The results were consistent with the evaluator’s
experience with the Student in that she has strengths in computation and rote skills, but
has more difﬁculty in applications and higher level thinking skills. [Testimony Special
Education Teacher, Exhibit B-81]

The school psychologist conducted his evaluation of the Student in December 2010 and
January 2011. As part of the evaluation, the Student was observed in a language alts
class and during her testing. The school psychologist administered the Woodcock—
Johnson 111 Tests of Cognitive Abilities (WJ III Cog), the Behavior Rating Inventory of
Executive Function (BRIEF) and the Behavior Assessment System for Children (BASC-
2). [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B—79]

The Student’s results on the BRIEF were favorable. The scores on the BRIEF are
1‘ep01ted as T~scores, a statistical tool that shows how the Student is performing relative
to the peer group, with average scores within the range of 35 to 65. The Student’s scores
on the BRIEF were: inhibit: 49, shift: 61, emotional control: 61, behavioral regulation
index: 58, initiate: 54, working memory: 54, plan/Oi'ganize: 70; organization of materials:
57; monitor: 70, metacognition index: 64; global executive index: 631 Based on the
results of the BRIEF, the Student’s executive functioning can be characterized as at age-
expected levels on a majority of domains with two areas of concern in

 

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

13.

14.

15.

16.

planning/organization and monitoring. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B-79]
These areas of concern in the BRIEF are consistent with the weaknesses which would be
seen in a student with Prader-Willi Syndrome. [Testimony Dr. Werblood]

The Student’s BASC-2 assessment, which included a self—report and teachers’ responses,
reveal that her behaviors are essentially typical across all measured domains with some
concerns related to learning problems, social withdrawal, planning ability and self—
monitoring. The student’s self—repont revealed at—risk levels of difﬁculty with feelings
related to controlling life events and developing satisfactory interpersonal relationships.
[Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B—79]

The Parents did not return their completed BASC‘Z and BRIEF checklists to the school
psychologist, [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B-79] The testing documents
may have come home in the Student’s backpack, but the Father would sometimes be
unaware of papers coming home Via the Student’s backpack. Even when the Parents
became aware of the lack of completion of the rating scales, they did not request that they
be provided rating scales to complete. [Testimony Father] Instead, the Parents
questioned the selection of the BASC as a testing instmment as they felt it was “hardly
the tool to use to update [the Student’s] level of needs.” [Testimony Mother; Exhibit P-
13] The omission of Parents’ responses did not invalidate the results of the BASC and
the BRIEF. These assessments provided helpful information about the Student’s
functioning, strengths and weaknesses.

The school psychologist administered the most recent version of the Woodcock Johnson
Tests of Cognitive Abilities, which is normed on a population which includes the
age/grade range of the Student. The school psychologist prefers to use this instrument
because it is a very well-constructed test which focuses on discrete and speciﬁc areas of
cognitive abilities. The Student had previously been administered the WISC IV [Exhibit
B—64], but the School Psychologist selected the WJ Ill Cog as it provides more speciﬁcity
regarding the cognitive processes that affect learning and it would provide more precise
information on the Student’s cognitive style. [Testimony School Psychologist; Exhibit
B-79] Dr. Werblood concurred that as a professional, she wants the ﬂexibility to select
the testing instrument when she conducts an assessment. [Testimony Dr. Werblood]
While the Parents assent that the WISC IV should have been the instrument selected for
the triennial reevaluation, the School Psychologists’ professional judgment as to the
testing instrument selected was appropriate.

The school psychologist explained that the standard score is the most useful score in
understanding the results, and is much more helpful than considering the age equivalent
or percentile scores. The Student’s standard scores in the W] 111 Cog were: verbal
ability, 88; thinking ability, 80; cog efﬁciency, 61; L-T retrieval, 76; process speed, 77;
working memory, 71; cognitive ﬂuency, 67; GIA (global intellectual ability), 77. The
scores on the W1 111 Cog have a mean of 100 with a standard deviation of 15 and an
average range of 85 to 115. The School Psychologist concluded that the Student’s
performance on cognitive tasks reﬂects an overall low to low average cognitive ability.
l-ler thinking ability and verbal ability is low average and her cognitive efﬁciency,

 

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

including her processing speed, shont term memow and working memory is low to
extremely low. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B-79]

The School Psychologist concluded that the W1 III Cog’s GIA score might be an
underestimate of the Student’s overall cognitive abilities and determined that the subtests
in terms of related groupings or clusters provide more precise information about the
Student and would better explain her strengths and weaknesses. [Testimony School
Psychologist; Exhibit B-79]

Based on his assessment the School Psychologist was able to characterize the Student’s
strengths and weaknesses, noting that the Student has an overall cognitive ability in the
low average range, which may be impacted by difﬁculty with short term memOIy and
cognitive ﬂuency. The School Psychologist noted that the cognitive ﬂuency area is
potentially the most difﬁcult for the Student to overcome and shared recommendations to
compensate for those weaknesses. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B—79]

The school psychologist was appropriately trained and credentialed to administer the
assessments to the Student. He was also familiar with Prader-Willi Syndrome, and the
manner in which this syndrome may impact a student’s functioning. He had reviewed the
Student’s educational records and prior evaluations prior to completing his assessments
of the Student. [Testimony School Psychologist]

The School Psychologist found that his assessments were consistent with his formal and
informal observations of the Student, as well as consistent with feedback obtained from
the rest of her educational team. Therefore, there was no need to conduct any further
assessments. The School Psychologist’s evaluation provided important information
which was used to develop an appropriate IEP for the Student and utilize and maximize
the use of her strengths to learn and access the curriculum. The School Psychologist felt
that different strategies and accommodations would assist in removing barriers to
learning. He recommended ways to address the area of rate of learning new information,
as well as provided the team with strategies to allow generalization to occur most
efﬁciently. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit B—79]

The School Psychologist provided a copy of his evaluation report to the Parents prior to
the PPT meeting scheduled to review the triennial reevaluation, which was sent as an
email to both Parents with an invitation to discuss the results. [Testimony School
Psychologist; Exhibits B-79, B—82]

The Parents emailed the School Psychologist regarding their comments about his repoﬁ.
Their ﬁrst comment was “We are responding to the Diagnostic study of our daughter [ ]
you emailed to us. Diagnostic? She has already been diagnosed. Please refer to her
records.” [Exhibit B-82] The School Psychologist chose the title “Report of Diagnostic
Study” for his evaluation report, not questioning the medical diagnosis, but because his
evaluation was to assist in the determination of whether the Student’s educational
disability continues to be present in accordance with IDEA. [Testimony School
Psychologist]

 

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

The Parents also expressed concern on the use of the BASC-2 as a tool in assessing the
Student. The School Psychologist agreed that it is not sufﬁcient on its own, but said that
the BASC-2 or a similar tool would be an appropriate too1 to evaluate the Student’s
ability to access curriculum in school and how she behaves in the environment. It is an
appropriate instrument to use with all students involved in public education, in that it
reveals and rules out problems including internalized problems such as anxiety,
depression and somatization. In the Student’s BASC-2 evaluation, the most important
piece was not only that the Student was withdrawing from social situations, it was that
she also self-repoﬁed that she felt isolated and not in control of outcomes. [Testimony
School Psychologist; Exhibits B—79, B-82]

1n the Parents’ email, they shared that they thought a neuropsychological NBPSY
evaluation should be completed. The School Psychologist responded to the Parents that
he did conduct testing on executive functioning, as well as conducted assessment of
behavior which also measured functioning. [Testimony School Psychologist, Exhibit P-
12] Dr. Werblood, who conducted a limited record review of the Student’s recent
evaluations, concurred that the testing completed by the School Psychologist tapped into
the skills that would be tested in the NEPSYT [Testimony Dr. Werblood]

In addition the School Psychologist explained that, as a multidisciplinary team, the
language arts consultant, the special education case manager and the school psychologist
discussed what assessments were most appropriate to use, and the assessments selected
were excellent tools to obtain accurate and helpful information about the Student and her
functioning. Given the level of learning difﬁculties that the Student was exhibiting, the
team determined that a more in-depth speciﬁc assessment should be completed regarding
math, so the Key Math was selected to obtain more in-depth achievement scores. The
School Psychologist invited the Parents to have a meeting or a phone conversation to
review and discuss the evaluation. While the Parents were dissatisﬁed with the School
Psychologist’s evaluation and response to their comments, they did not request a meeting
to discuss the evaluation further. [Testimony School Psychologist, Father; Exhibit P-12]

The results of the triennial testing were reviewed at a PPT meeting on F ebruary 1 1, 201 1.
After review of the triennial reevaluation, the members of the PPT agreed that the
Student continued to be eligible for special education and related services and the new
goals and objectives were discussed and accepted. At this PPT meeting, the Parents did
not state they disagreed with the Board’s triennial reevaluation and did not request an
independent evaluation. [Testimony LA Consultant, School Psychologist, Mother, Father;
Exhibit B-83] The Mother and the Father had the assistance of the Grandmother, who is
a Connecticut school psychologist, at this PPT meeting. [Testimony Grandmother]

The PPT convened on February 3, 2012. At this PPT meeting the Parents disagreed with
the Board’s evaluation conducted during the 2010-1 1 school year, and indicated that they
exercised their rights to an independent evaluation. [Exhibit B~97] The Parents also
submitted a lengthy written memorandum at the PPT meeting as to what they felt was the
Student’s lack of progress over the years. [Testimony Mother; Exhibit P-8] At this PPT
meeting the Parents’ advocate requested an out of district placement, but the Mother

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12~0309

testiﬁed that the advocate misspoke on their behalf when she requested the out of district
placement. [Testimony Mother]

28. The Board brought this action to defend the appropriateness of its evaluation of the
Student. [Exhibit H.O.-1]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Board brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act [IDEA] which provides for special education and related services to children with
disabilities, from birth through age 21. It is undisputed that the Student has been eligible for
special education and related services under the disability category of Other Health Impaired
pursuant to state and federal laws. §e_e Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 10—76 et. seq.; the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C. § 1401, et seq

If a parent requests an independent educational evaluation at public expense, the public
agency must, without unnecessary delay, either—(i) File a due process complaint to request a
hearing to show that its evaluation is appropriate; or (ii) ensure that an independent educational
evaluation is provided at public expense. 34 CFR §300.502 The Board appropriately submitted
its hearing request in accordance with these regulations.

To conduct an appropriate evaluation, the Board must ensure that the evaluation is
comprehensive. In accordance with 34 CFR §305, as part of any reevaluation, the IEP Team and
other qualiﬁed professionals, as appropriate, must—

“(1) Review existing evaluation data on the child including—(i) Evaluations and
information provided by the parents of the child; (ii) C urrent classroam—based, local, or

State assessments, and classroom-based observations; and (iii) Observations by teachers

and related services providers; and (2) 0n the basis of that review. and inputﬁ'om the

child’s parents, identify what additional data, ifany, are needed to determine. . . (B) In
case Ufa reevaluation ofa child, whether the child continues to have such a disability,
and the educational needs of the child; (ii) The present levels of academic achievement
and related developmental needs of the child; . e . (B) In the case of a reevaluation ofa

child, whether the child continues to need special education and related services; and (iv)
Whether any additions or modifications to the special education and related services are

 

June 29, 2012 F ina] Decision and Order 12-0309

needed to enable the child to meet the measurable annual goals set out in the IEP 0f the

child and to participate, as appropriate, in the general education curriculzmz , . , The

public agency must administer such assessments and other evaluation measures as may
be needed to produce the data identiﬁed under paragraph (a) of this section. ” 34 CFR

5800505

In this case, the Board conducted an appropriate review in accordance with the federal
regulations.

The Parents objected to the triennial reevaluation because the Board’s evaluators did not
select the testing instruments that the Parents preferred. Among the complaints was that the
WISC IV, which was an assessment administered in prior evaluations, was not i'e-administered
during the most recent triennial reevaluation. The school psychologist provided a credible,
sound and appropriate reason for selection of the WJ III Cog, rather than the WISC IV. The
Parents also expressed a preference for the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test (WIAT)
rather than the achievement testing completed by the Board. The Board’s selection of
achievement testing was appropriate and directed at obtaining speciﬁc and impOItant information
about the Student’s strengths, weaknesses and current academic functioning.

The selection of the various assessment tools was appropriate in this case and was in
accordance with appropriate professional standards and judgment. The assessments conducted
were appropriate in that the assessors were qualiﬁed to conduct the assessments, used multiple
and validated assessment tools, assessed generally in all areas of suspected disability, utilized
nondiscriminatory assessments, directed the assessments at determining the Student’s strengths
and weaknesses and did not rely on one test or tool to make their determinations. The selection

of paﬁicular testing or evaluation instruments is left to the discretion of the LEA Letter to

Baumlrog, 39 IDELR 159 (OSEP 2002); Letter 10 Anonymous, 20 IDELR 542 (OSEP 1993)

 

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

At the hearing, the Parents claimed that they were presented with the consent form for the
triennial reevaluation, but were given no explanation of the tests to be conducted. The consent
form outlined the evaluations that were to be conducted and clearly included a name and phone
number of the person to contact for further information, but the Parents never contacted the
Board for a fulther explanation or clariﬁcation of the testing. The Parents also did not question
the Board about the evaluations during team meetings and other communications with the Board
staff. The Board appropriately communicated to the Parents information about the evaluations
that were conducted for the triennial reevaluation, and the Parents had full and ample opportunity
to provide input and seek clariﬁcation and information about the triennial reevaluation.

The Parents were full participants in the Student’s program, and the PPT has had the
beneﬁt of parental input about the Student throughout the course of the time the Student has been
educated at the Board schools.

During the course of the hearing, the Parents advanced a position not previously
presented, that the Board failed to have a medical evaluation of the Student as part of the
triennial reevaluation. The diagnosis of Prader-Willi Syndrome has not been changed for the
Student and the Board has adequate and appropriate information on how the syndrome impacts
the Student’s education. There was no reason for a medical evaluation proffered by the Parents,
nor any evidence which supported that such a request was made by the Parents prior to hearing.
The Board’s triennial reevaluation was appropriate, even in the absence of an additional medical
evaluation.

The Parents also claim that the triennial reevaluation was lacking in that a Vineland
assessment of adaptive functioning was not conducted. The Board did obtain information about

adaptive skills from the BASC—Z, which was palt of the triennial reevaluation. According to the

10

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0309

testimony OfDY. Wel‘blood, the Vineland is an instrument that she selects to check on adaptive
functioning if students have borderline cognitive functioning. The Student’s cognitive
functioning exceeds the borderline level. Adaptive skills were reviewed as part of the triennial
reevaluation and the Board’s selection of the instrument to test adaptive skills was appropriate.
The Board’s triennial reevaluation of the Student was comprehensive and appropriate.
The Board conducted the assessment in a thorough and comprehensive manner, utilizing a
variety of assessment tools to gather relevant functional, developmental and academic
information about the child and not relying on one sole measure or assessment; using
assessments that were valid, reliable and administered appropriately; selecting the assessments
tailored to the Student’s needs; testing in all areas related to the Student’s disability and ensuring
that the evaluation was sufﬁciently comprehensive to identify all of the Student’s special
education and related service needs and provided relevant information that directly assisted the

PPT in determining the educational needs of the Student.1

' (b) Conduct afevalualion. In conducting the evaluation, the public agency mustgﬂ) Use a variety of assessment
tools and strategies to gather relevant functional, developmental, and academic information about the child,
including information provided by the parent, that may assist in determininggﬁ) Whether the child is a child with a
disability under § 3008; and(ii) The content 0fthe child's IEP, including information related to enabling the child to
be involved in and progress in the general education cutTiculum (or for a preschool child, to paiticipate in
appropriate activities);

(2) Not use any single measure or assessment as the sole criterion for determining whether a child is a child with a
disability and for determining an appropriate educational program for the child; and (3) Use technically sound
instruments that may assess the relative contribution of cognitive and behavioral factors, in addition to physical or
developmental factors. (0) Other evaluation procedures. Each public agency must ensure that—(l) Assessments and
other evaluation materials used to assess a child under this part—(i) Are selected and administered so as not to be
discriminatory on a racial or cultural basis;(ii) Are provided and administered in the child's native language or other
mode of communication and in the form most likely to yield accurate infonnation on what the child knows and can
do academically, developmentally, and functionally, unless it is Clearly not feasible to so provide or administer;(iii)
Are used for the pulposes for which the assessments or measures are valid and reliable;(iv) Are administered by
trained and knowledgeable personnel; and(v) Are administered in accordance with any instructions provided by the
producer of the assessments.(2) Assessments and other evaluation materials include those tailored to assess speciﬁc
areas of educational need and not merely those that are designed to provide a single general intelligence quotient.(3)
Assessments are selected and administered so as best to ensure that if an assessment is administered to a child with
impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills, the assessment results accurately reﬂect the child's aptitude or
achievement level or whatever other factors the test pinpons to measure, rather than reﬂecting the child's impaired
sensoty, manual, or speaking skills (unless those skills are the factors that the test puiports to measure).(4) The child

ll

June 29, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0309

The Board’s triennial evaluation of the Student was appropriate, and conducted in a
thorough and comprehensive manner. Therefore, the Student is not entitled to an IEE at Board’s

expense.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:
1. The Board’s triennial evaluation of the Student is appropriate.

2. The Parents are not entitled to an IEE at Board expense.

 

is assessed in all areas related to the suspected disability, including, if appropriate, health, vision, hearing, social and
emotional status, general intelligence, academic performance, communicative status, and motor abilities;(5)
Assessments of children with disabilities who transfer from one public agency to another public agency in the same
school year are coordinated with those children's prior and subsequent schools, as necessaiy and as expeditiously as
possible, consistent with § 300.301(d)(2) and (e), to ensure prompt completion of full evaluations.(6) In evaluating
each child with a disability under §§ 300.304 through 300.306, the evaluation is sufﬁciently comprehensive to
identify all of the child's special education and related services needs, whether 01‘ not commonly linked to the
disability category in which the child has been classiﬁed.(7) Assessment tools and strategies that provide relevant
infonnation that directly assists persons in determining the educational needs of the child are provided. 34 CRF
§300‘304

12

 

