December 22, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12-0108

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Darien Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Anne Treimanis
Law Ofﬁce of Anne 1. Treimanis LLC
10 Wall Street
Noxwalk, CT 06850

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Andreana R. Bellach
Attorney Christopher Tracey
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
300 Atlantic Street
Stamford, CT 06901

Appearing before: Attorney Janis Ct Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Attorney via letter dated September 13, 201 1.1 It was received by Board of Education (“BOB")
on September 13. The thilty-day resolution period ended October 13 and the original deadline to
mail the ﬁnal decision and order was November 27.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on October 3. Attorney Treimanis
appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney Bellach appeared on behalf of BOE. The following
issues were identiﬁed at the pre-hearing conference:

1. Did BOE fail to provide Student with a free appropriate public education during the

201 1 extended school year?

2. Did BOE fail to offer Student a free appropriate public education during the 201 1—12

school year?

3. Did BOE fail to allow Student’s Parent to be meaningful panicipants in the IEP

process?

4. Did BOE fail to appropriately evaluate Student in all areas of suspected disabilities?

5. If the answer to any of the above questions is in the afﬁrmative, what shall be the

remedy?

' All dates are 201 1 unless otherwise indicated.

December 22, 201 1 Final Decision and Order 12-0108

The parties agreed to paiticipate in mediation in lieu of a resolution session. The patties
participated in mediation on October 25 but did not reach an agreement.

Via e-mail dated November 9, BOE’S Attorney requested a 45-day extension of the
mailing date. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request For an extension was
granted, limited to a thi1ty day extension as permitted by State regulation. The deadline to mail
the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until December 27.

Hearing was scheduled for December 14. Via e-mail dated December 7, Student’s
Attorney notiﬁed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that the parties had been working diligently on a
settlement; that the patties verbally reached a settlement; that BOE’s Attorney will prepare a
ﬁnal written settlement agreement on December 12; and that the agreement will be signed if it is
in conformity with the terms of the verbal agreement. In light of that representation, the
December 14 hearing was cancelled.

The palties were given until December 20 to either ﬁle a motion to withdraw based on
the settlement agreement or request an extension of the mailing date and provide the Hearing
Ofﬁcer with mutually available hearing dates. On December l6, Student’s Attorney indicated

that the matter was settled and withdrew the request for due process with prejudice.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed with prejudice.

 

