September 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0521

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Notth Haven Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Klebanoff& Alfano, PC,

West Hartford, CT 061 10
Danbury, CT 06811

Appearing on behalf of Board: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Haltford, CT 06103—1919

Appearing Before: Attorney Robelt Skelley
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
Issues:

1. Does the June 6, 2012 IEP offer the Student FAPE with an appropriate program and
placement, and if not, does the Devereux Glenholme residential program provide an
appropriate placement and program?

2. Does the Student require a residential p1acement and program for educational reasons, or is a
day program appropriate for the provision of FAPB?

Procedural Histmy:

This matter is before the Hearing Ofﬁcer pursuant to a Request for Due Process Hearing ﬁled by
the Student on June 26, 2012, and received by the Board on the same date. On July 9, 2012, the
Board ﬁled a Sufﬁciency Challenge. A pre-hearing conference scheduled for July 10, 2012. At
the pre—hearing conference the parties agreed to seek mediation in lieu of a resolution meeting.
Counsel for the Parents requested a thirty day extension of the mailing date to allow for
mediation; both counsel stated that the extension would not negatively impact the Student. The
request for extension of the mailing date was granted. The Sufﬁciency Challenge was set aside
pending the results of the mediation which was scheduled for August 28, 2012. Subsequent to
the mediation, on September 19, 2012, counsel for the Parents stated via electronic mail that the
parties had reached resolution on the matter and that the Parents were withdrawing the pending

complaint.
Final Decision. and Order:

It is therefore ordered that pursuant to the request by the Parents to withdraw their request for
due process, any pending motions not yet resolved are dismissed as moot and this matter is

dismissed without prejudice.

 

