May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

K.G. v, Board ofEducation

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: John Cvejanovich, Esq.

O’Connell, Attmore & Morris, LLC
71 Park Avenue, Suite C
West Springﬁeld, MA 01089

Appearing on behalfof the Board: Rebecca Santiago, Esq.

Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hanford, CT 06103—1919

Appearing before: Mary H.B. Gelfman, Esq.

’ Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES: (as discussed on January 20, 2012 and subsequently revised on February 20,
2012)

1.

Were the Individualized Education Program (IEP) and placement developed at the
May, 201 1, Flaming and Placement Team (PPT) meeting, including extended school
day sewices, appropriate to the Student’s special education needs in the least
restrictive environment for the Student?

Did the Board commit procedural errors in scheduling and convening the December
14, 2011, PPT meeting?

After notice from Easton Country Day School (ECDS) dated November 29, 2011,
were the December 14, 2011, IEP and proposed change ot‘location 0f Student’s
placement appropriate to the Student’s special education needs in the least restrictive
environment?

Was the Student’s then-current placement at ECDS no longer appropriate to her
special education needs, in that some aspects OfStudent’s IEP would no longer be
provided by ECDS?

IfECDS is no longer an appropriate special education placement for the Student, is
placement at either Devereaux School or Arch Bridge School appropriate to her
special education needs?

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

6. Was the Board’s refusal to include Adaptive Music, Adaptive Physical Education,
Adaptive Art, two Cooking Classes and one week at Camp Jewell Ranch Camp in
Student’s 201 1 extended school year (ESY) special education services appropriate?

7. Does the Board have the right to select the provider of IEP Occupational Therapy
(OT) services to the Student?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This hearing was requested by Parent on January 9, 2012. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was
appointed on January 10, 2012. The date for mailing the decision was March 22, 2012.

Included in the Parent’s January 9, 2012, request for a hearing was a request for an order
of“Stay Put”, pursuant to Section 34 CPR. §300.518 (a) and Section 10—76h—17 (21),
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (R.C.S.A.) The Hearing Ofﬁcer responded on
January 20, 2012, ordering the Board to continue Student’s then-current placement at
ECDS pending the completion of the hearing.

At the pre-hearing conference on January 20, 2012, it was reponed that a resolution
session had been scheduled, but the Parent had notiﬁed the Board that she would not
attend. The hearing was scheduled for F ebmary 15 and 22, 2012.

By letter dated January 17, 2012, the Board asked the Hearing Ofﬁcer to strike portions
of the request for hearing that it considered moot, inaccurate, or outside the jurisdiction of
a special education hearing ofﬁcer appointed pursuant to 34 C.F.R. §§300.507 and
300.508. The Hearing Ofﬁcer responded on J anuary 25, 2012, dismissing some of the
Parent’s issues and slightly revising the issues discussed in the January 20, 2012, pre-
hearing conference.

On January 26, 2012, the Palties agreed to request a state mediator for this case and
related cases involving the Student’s two siblings, and requested that the Hearing Ofﬁcer
postpone the hearing dates so that the mediation could be held on Febmary 15 and a PPT
meeting could be held on February 22. The Hearing Ofﬁcer agreed and re—scheduled the
hearing for March 5 and 7, 2012.

By letter dated February 29, 2012, the Board objected to Parent’s plan to take testimony
by telephone. The Hearing Ofﬁcer responded with a list of requirements for telephone
testimony, including the consent of the other patty to the hearing. The witness agreed to
appear in person.

The hearing convened on March 5 and 7, 2012, and additional hearing dates of March 21
and April 5 and 24, 2012, were added. The Palties requested that the decision date of
March 22 be extended to accommodate the additional hearing dates. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
granted that request and extended the decision date from March 22 to April 20, 2012.

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0216

 

The hearing session scheduled for April 5 was postponed because the Board’s Attorney
was detained out of state by tornados. The Parties agreed to add April 25 as a hearing
date, and requested an extension of the decision date. The Hearing Ofﬁcer extended the
decision date to May 21, 2012.

At the hearing session on March 5, 2012, the proffered documentary exhibits were
reviewed by the Parties and the Hearing Ofﬁcer. Generally speaking, the Board objected
to all documents dated prior to the two-year statute of limitations for special education
appeals. The issues identiﬁed by the Patties included the school years 2009-2010 and
2010-201 1. There was also discussion over whether the Hearing Ofﬁcer could rule on a
contract dispute.

Prior to convening a hearing session for Student’s sibling on April 12, 2012, the Hearing
Ofﬁcer discussed scheduling with the Parties. It was agreed that the Attorneys would
submit briefs in lieu of closing arguments: briefs would be due on May 9, 2012.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

SUMMARY:

The Student has been attending ECDS for several years, placed and funded by the School
District. Student’s May 201 1 IEP continued that placement for the 2011-2012 school
year. In December, 2011, the Board proposed changing Student’s placement after a
contractual disagreement with ECDS concerning after school services in the IEP and
payment with ECDS. Parent, who was not present at the December 201 1 PPT meeting,
pointed to the success of the ECDS placement and had objected to the change.

In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act 01’ 1974, 20 U.S.C. § 1232g and related regulations at 34 CPR. §
99, the following decision uses “Student”, “School”, “Parent” and titles of school staff
members and other witnesses in place of names and other personally identiﬁable
information. The school district in this case will be referred to as the school district or
the Board Individual professionals are referred to by title; a list ot‘the individuals by
name is provided for the Parties only.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact
and conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law set fonh herein,
which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other
supported evidence on the record. To the extent that the procedural history, summary,
and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions ol’law, they should be so considered,
and vice versa. For reference, see SAS Instilule Inc, v. [-1. Computer Systems, Inc, 605
F.Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Am F. v. Calallen Independent School
District, 835 F.Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993).

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Panies, including documentary
evidence and testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

11 Student was born on July 19, 2000, and is now eleven years of age. She has a history
of Autism, allergies, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and anxiety. In 2007,
she was diagnosed with aplastic anemia and received a bone marrow transplant She
spent three months in the hospital and a signiﬁcant period of time at home to
recuperate. She was advised by her physicians to 113/ to avoid exposure to germs,
especially at school, because her immune system had been compromised. She
observed her brothers’ difﬁculties with school, and became severely school avoidant.
(Testimony, Mother Tr. 3/7/2012 pp‘ 230—231, 234; Testimony, Neuropsychologist
Tr. 3/5/2012 pp. 56-65; Ex. HO-2, B-29 pp. 18-34)

2. After the transplant, the Board provided homebound instruction from tutors. When
she was well enough to resume attending school for paltial days, the PPT agreed to
send her to ECDS, where her brothers had been placed by the School District. At
ﬁrst, she “visited”, coming to school for partial days and receiving one—to-one
tutoring in a room that had been designated for her brothers when they needed to be
somewhere quiet. She became a full-time student at ECDS in approximately 2009.
When she began to attend classes, the placement was formalized by the Board’s PPT.
(Testimony, ECDS Director Tr. 3/5/2012 pp. 256—262; Testimony, Former Board
Director of Special Education, Tr. 3/7/2012 pp. 162, 168-172; Testimony, Mother Tr.
3/7/2012 pp. 230-238; Testimony, Current Therapist, Tr. 3/5/2012 pp. 65-66)

3. ECDS is not approved for publically funded special education placements by the
Connecticut State Depa1tment of Education. The Director of ECDS is a state certiﬁed
special education teacher. She described ECDS as:

We have everybody, we have every color under the sun, every religion under the

sun. We have I’d say about 20% of our population are giﬁed children. We have

about 40% of our population are fairly typical — bright typical kids. And another

30%, if not a little bit more — many gifted children have some issues ‘have some

kind of learning issues of one kind or another. We have children with Asperger’s,

we have children with auditory processing issues, dyslexia, a number of issues.
(Testimony, ECDS Director Tr. 3/5/2012 p.256)

4. Student’s learning is also impeded by her sensory problems, difﬁculties with social
interactions and OCD behavior. An early Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA)
approach to educating her had been unsuccessful. (Testimony, Neuropsychologist,
Tr. 3/5/2012 pp. 66-68, 73)

5. The Board also arranged for an evaluation by a Rhode Island psychologist who was
reported to be a specialist in children regarded as twice exceptional, that is, having a
disability and also being very bright. Educational Consultant B, who was also active

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

 

’iﬁ’tﬁéér’eﬁ'6'f'twicé’eiceftibna1 children, paiticxpated’m the development of Student’s
original IEP and placement and returned as Parent’s witness in this hearing. She was
not directly involved in Student’s program during the interim, but did respond to
telephone consultations with Parents and ECDS staff working with Student from time
to time. (Testimony, Former Director oi‘Special Education Tr, 3/7/2012 pp. 164—168;
Testimony, Consultant B. Tr. 3/5/2012 pp. 187-196)

6, The Board’s PPT met on May 17, 201 1, to plan a triennial evaluation and for the
annual review of the Student’s special education program. Present at this meeting
were: the Board’s Director of Special Education, Student’s Parents, Regular and
Special Education Teachers from ECDS, Board’s Occupational Therapist (OT), two
OTs from the contracted OT provider for Student, the Director of ECDS and
Attorneys for Parents and the Board. (Ex. B—5 p. 2)

7. The May 17, 201 1 PPT repoxted Student’s Present Levels of Academic Achievement
and Functional Performance:
Academic/Cognitive/Language Arts: [Student] has improved to a 5m grade reading
level. Phonics and reading comprehension are areas 01" improvement. Decoding when
in context rather than in isolation has improved. Retelling and inferencing are
continued areas of difﬁculty.
Strengths: Relative strength in oral comprehension, verbal skills, expressive
vocabulary.
Concerns/Needs: [Student] demonstrates limited comprehension of narrative
text that exceeds the length of a paragraph; making inferences in reading and
through writing; identifying main ideas in passage longer than a paragraph;
mechanics and organization of written thoughts
Impact of disability: Due to [Student’s] compulsive behaviors, engagement in
fantasy thought, ocular, sensory and ﬁne and gross motor difﬁculties and misread
of cues from adults and peers [Student] requires specialized, speciﬁc instruction
in the areas of reading and writing to develop phonetic skills, reading
comprehension and organization of written thought.

Academic/Cognitive: Math: [Student] had demonstrated improvement in the area of

basic addition and subtraction, but continues to have difﬁculty in the areas of

multiplication and division and employing order of operation and overall computation.
Strengths: Improvements gained in the areas of basic addition and subtraction.
Concerns/Needs: Concerns exist regarding multiplication, order ofopei'ation and
identiﬁcation of key words for solving applied problems.
Impact of disability: Due to [Student’s] compulsive behaviors, engagement in
fantasy thought, ocular, sensory and ﬁne and gross motor difﬁculties and misread
0f cues from adults and peers [Student] requires specialized, specific instruction
in the area of basic multiplication, completion ofapplied word problems and
employing order of operations to conduct math computation.

Other Academic/Nonacademic Areas: [Student] has made progress in her level of
engagement in social studies and science curriculum and in overall functioning in the

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0216

 

Hillcational envu‘onmem; liBWEveI‘, [Sﬁdént] contlnEéS to require suppoﬁ anar
instruction in these areas.

Strengths: [Student] is a cooperative and engaged student.
Concerns/Necds: [Student’s] level of participation in social studies and science
classes and in overall organization skills such as independently using an
assignment pad, using folders to organize papers and to structure time for
studying are areas of concern.
Impact of disability: Due to [Student’s] compulsive behaviors, engagement in
fantasy thought, ocular, sensory and ﬁne and gross motor difﬁculties and misread
of cues from adults and peers [Student] requires specialized, speciﬁc instruction
and suppon in the areas of maintaining paﬂicipation in the cun‘iculum and
classroom setting for social studies and science and in developing organization
skills to be able to function more effectively and independently in the educational
environment.

Behavioral/Social/Emotional: Improvements demonstrated in overall functioning,
daily functioning impacted by: compulsions and obsessive thoughts, engagement in
fantasy thought and misread of social cues, anger and anxiety.
Strengths: [Student] continues to improve in her self image, has made gains in
her ability to effectively function in the school setting.
Concerns/Necds: Tendency to misperceive transient physical symptoms,
modulation of emotionality, management of obsessive and compulsive thoughts
and behaviors, social awareness and social interactions and engagement in fantasy
thoughts.
Impact of Disability: Due to [Student’s] compulsive behaviors, engagement in
fantasy thought, sensmy processing difﬁculties and misread ofsocial cues,
[Student] requires specialized instruction and support to develop her social and
emotional coping skills to engage in academic and social learning.

Communication and Vocational/I‘ransitional: Age appropriate.

Health and Development —- including Vision and Hearing: [Student] panicipates in
full day school programming and after school related services. Physical stamina and
endurance have improved.

Strengths: [Student] engages in full and extended day programming and is
making gains in her self concept.

Concerns/Needs: [Student’s) limited endurance and stamina and at times,
perception 0ft1‘ansient physical symptoms to be indicative of recurring ill health
and fragility.

Impact of Disability: Due to [Student’s] compulsive behaviors, engagement in
fantasy thought, sensmy processing difﬁculties and misread of social cues,
[Student] requires specialized instruction and suppon to develop strategies for
coping with physical condition.

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12—0216

sensory information; maneuvering through the educational environments; and
coordinating and processing visual-motor information.
Strengths: [Student] has made gains in the areas of sensory processing and ﬁne
and gross motor and is cooperative and engaged in related services sessions,
Concerns/Necds: Ability to effectively utilize sensory breaks, maneuver through
the educational environment, ﬁne motor and visual skills.
Impact of Disability: Due to sensory processing difﬁculties, ﬁne and gross
motor difﬁculties, [Student] requires occupational therapy and support to develop
ﬁne and gross motor and effective sensory processing to more successfully and
independently navigate the educational environment.

Activities of Daily Living: [Student] cun‘ently has educational staff assistance in
managing educational expectations.
Strengths: Works well and is responsive to adult guidance.
Concerns/Needs: [Student] requires guidance and instruction to palticipate in
general curriculum and to organize academic expectations.
Impact of Disability: Due to compulsive behaviors, engagement in fantasy
thought, sensory processing difﬁculties and misread 01‘social cues, [Student]
requires specialized instmction and support to develop her ability to organize and
structure her study time. (Ex. B~5 pp. 9-10)

8. The May 17, 201 1 PPT meeting record listed as PPT recommendations:
Implement IEP.
Continued placement at ECDS.
Provide ESY sewices.
Conduct neuropsychological evaluation of cognitive and executive and
social/emotional functioning; conduct OT evaluation of ﬁne and gross motor and
sensory processing; conduct academic evaluation of reading, math and writing
skills.
Extended day programming up to 12.5 hours weekly, including tutorials in
content areas.
1:1 staff support throughout [school day] during school year and during ESY at
ECDS.
10 hours direct service to be delivered by [Consultant A] during summer to
address academic and social/emotional goals. (Ex. B-5 p. 3)

9. The May 17, 2011 PPT developed the following goals for the 201 12012 school year:
1. [Student] will make gains and demonstrate academic progress in the area 01‘
Mathematics.

2. [Student] will improve her reading comprehension.

3. [Student] will build executive functioning skills to increase independence.
4‘ [Student] will make gains and demonstrate academic progress in the area of
Language Arts.

5. [Student] will improve skills in mechanics of writing.

61 [Student] will develop and improve expository writing skills.

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

8. [Student] will make gains and demonstrate academic progress in the area of
Histony.

9. [Student] will improve academic knowledge in the area of Science.

10. [Student] will continue to improve her self—image and with an increasing
emphasis upon strength, resilience, and physical wellness. She will diminish her
reﬂexive tendency to perceive transient physical symptoms as signs oi‘recurring
ill health and fragility.

l 1. [Student] will improve her symptom management of her obsessive
compulsive condition, employing methods such as thought stopping, cognitive
reappraisal, exposure and response prevention, relaxation training, and distractive
techniques.

12. [Student] will continue to improve her capacity at modulating strong
emotional responses, with an emphasis on the emotional states of anger and
anxiety.

13. [Student] will learn to better modulate her voice volume.

14. [Student] will continue to improve her awareness of physical boundaries
between individuals and what rules govern body contact, physical distance, and
other related features of this social skill.

15. [Student] will continue to strengthen her ability to asseltively express her
emotions when in interaction with others.

16. [Student] will increase her capacity to disengage from her inner fantasy world
so that she can be reliably available for her academic work, [activities oi‘daiiy
living], or social interaction in 8 out of 10 instances.

17. [Student] will improve her conversational skills and increase her capacity to
identify the needs and interests of others in her communications.

18. [Student] will demonstrate improved gross motor skills for successful
maneuvering through the educational enviromnent.

19. [Student] will demonstrate improved visual motor and ﬁne motor skills for
successful participation in various activities.

20. [Student] will demonstrate improve visual skills for successful completion of
activities during educational activities.

21. [Student] will participate in sensory breaks when needed, across educational
settings.

22. [Student] will learn computer skills needed for academic success. (Ex. B—l2
through B-43)

10. Program accommodations and modiﬁcations listed for the Student in the May 17,
2011 IEP:

Materials/Books/Equipment: Access to computer, access to computer both at
home and school, access to Smart Board, Handwriting Without Tears materials.
Tests/Quizzcs/Assessments: Alternative Test Setting, Extra time on tests and
quizzes, Extra time on Written Work, One to one suppoxt for reading and
dictation.
Grading: Modiﬁed grades based on IEP.
Organization: Sensory breaks.

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

'Eﬁyiionment: Flexibility ii: leavrﬁ'g elass'i'odeSszilWl sWe'ttWith. W W WW

Behavioral Interventions and Support: Cue expected behavior.
Instructional Strategies: Pre-teach content,

Other: Access to alternative classroom setting.

Frequency and Duration of Supports Required for School Personnel to
Implement This IEP Include: Neuropsychologist to provide weekly
consultation up to 2.5 hours. OT to provide training to school staff at the
beginning of the school year and to provide consultation to school staff Via
email/telephone communication monthly. Training/consultation will be provided
to any new staff to [Student’s] programming, by parent, school staff and related
service providers. 1:1 suppon provided across educational settings. (Ex. B-S p.
44)

1 1. Student would continue to be suppox’ted by a 1:1 teacher in the classroom. It was
planned that this substantial level of support would eventually fade as Student
becomes more independent and conﬁdent in classroom settings. (Ex. B-5 pp. 48-49)

12. The service grid for the May 17, 201 l IEP shows the following:
Language Am Instruction 2.00 hr/wk Individual Instluction Reg. ed Teacher
Language Arts Instruction 1.33 hr/daily Inclusion/general education
Language Arts Instruction 1.33 hr/wk Community based

Math Instruction 0.67 hr/daily Inclusion/general education
Math Instruction 2.00 hr/wk Individual Instmction Reg. ed Teacher
Study Skills Instruction 0.75 hr.daily Inclusion/general education

Social Studies Instmction 0.17 h1‘.daily Individual Instruction
Social Studies Instruction 0.50 hLdaily lnclusion/general education

Science Instruction 0.67 hr.dai1y Inclusion/general education
Science Instmction 1.33 hr.wk Individual Instruction
Technology Instruction 0.67 hr.daily Inclusion/general education
Technology Instruction 1.00 lutwk Individual Instruction
Occupational Therapy 1.00 hr.wl( Individual Instruction

Counseling group/individual 10.00 hr, monthly Individual Instmction
(Ex. B-S pp. 47-49)

13. The May 17, 2011 PPT meeting also discussed an ESY program for the Student, for
the summer of 201 1. The IEP listed ESY services to be provided: Counseling, group
and/or individual, by the Current Therapist; OT, individual instruction; Teclmology
individual instruction; and behavioral support by Special Education Teacher,
Classroom Teacher and Educational Consultant A. These sewices included a full
school day program the week after school ended for the year and a full school day
program the week before school resumed. Some socialization would be included.
(Ex. B-5, pp. 47-50)

14. Parent requested, and the PPT denied, additional ESY services ot‘cooking, alt, sleep-
away camp, adaptive music and sports/athletic coaching. Parent stressed that these
activities were primarily intended to “enhance and prevent regression of peer

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

interactive75766511351197. (Ex. 71737—775 ﬁigjii'lii’estiriiehji,i’lrjérfentﬂ'rli‘i‘f3i/21/2012 ppi25—32;
Testimony, Director of Special Education Tr. 4/24/2012 pp. 65-69)

Student’s Mother, the Director of ECDS, Student’s Current Therapist and
Educational Consultant A who supervised the Student’s aﬁei‘ school program,

who attended the May 17, 2011, PPT meeting, submitted a statement questioning
some of the elements of the PPT record. All of their proposed goals had been
incorporated in the IEP. They a1so requested that various current service providers be
named in the IEP as providing sewices in the IEP, which the PPT refused. (Ex. B-S
pp. 52—69)

No identiﬁable IEP progress reports were offered at the hearing for the school years
2009-2010 01'2010-2011.

Student’s progress repelts 101‘2010-201 1 from ECDS show:

Subject 11/13/2010 2/19/2011 6/1/2011
American Studies On grade level On grade level On grade level
Art On grade level On grade level On grade level
Drama Above grade level Above grade levelAbove grade level
IEP goals Below grade level
Literature 011 grade level On grade level On grade level
Math Needs more support Needs more support Is progressing
and practice to and practice to toward objectives
meet objectives meet objectives as expected.
Physical Education On grade level On grade level On grade level
Science On grade level On grade level On grade level
Writing On grade level On grade level On grade level
Executive Function On grade level
Debate On grade level On grade level
(Ex. B-4, B-7)

The Current Therapist, who sees Student approximately two hours a week, reported
on Student’s socia1 difﬁculties. The current school year, 201 1-2012, is the ﬁrst time
that Student has had a group of friends with whom she sometimes eats lunch and
plays on the playground. However, the interplay of Autism Spectrum Disorder, OCD
and anxiety make this progress both slow and fragile. (Testimony, Current Therapist
Tr. 3/5/2012 p. 67)

A copy of Student’s undated weekly schedule at ECDS was entered on the record of
the hearing. Although no actual times are provided (eight daily class periods with
breaks for snack and lunch) it is obvious that Student had a busy and complicated
school day. Time for transportation and the extended school day at home are omitted
from this schedule. (Ex. B] 8)

On August 19, 201 1, the Board’s Director of Special Education notified Parent that
OT services would be provided by an OT employed by the Board, rather than the

10

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

21

22.

23.

24.

to provide OT at ECDS, and for the OT to collaborate with Student’s teachers in
providing appropriate suppoﬁs in the classroom. Parent opposed this change, stating
that she would not allow it. (Testimony, Director of Special Education Tr. 4/24/2012
pp.70—76; Ex. 13—8)

. Student’s ﬁrst trimester report card 2011—2012 showed the following:

Art Effon Excellent, At Grade Level

Debate Effort Excellent, At Grade Level

Drama Effort Excellent, Above Grade Level

English Grade A—, Effort Excellent, At Grade Level
Progressing toward objectives

Math Grade A, Effort Excellent, At Grade Level

Physical Education Progressing toward objectives, EffOIt Good
At Grade Level

Social Studies Consistently Achieving Objectives, Effort

Excellent, At Grade Level
Attendance repoﬂed as one late to school and one absence. A tutorial, Play and
Executive Function were listed “No repon cards deﬁned for this course”. (Ex. B—l9)

Although no contract was in place at the start of the 201 1—2012 school year, ECDS
started the year using the IEP developed on May 17, 201 1. An underlying difﬁculty
was that the ECDS school day could not accommodate all of Student’s supported
regular classroom placements and IEP services. Some direct ihstmction (tutorials)
could be shifted to the home after—school program, but Parent preferred that the same
ECDS staff members who presented such instruction to Student during the school day
also provide tutorial time in the after school program. Because of individual teachers’
schedules, varied contractual pay rates and deliveiy of the after school program in
Student’s home, the ECDS Director and ECDS Business Manager wrote to the
Board’s Director of Special Education on November 29, 201], that ECDS would no
longer be able to provide the afternoon program. (Testimony, ECDS Director Tr.
3/5/2012 pp. 263, 276- 286; Tr. 3/7/2012 pp. 3—1 1; Testimony, Director of Special
Education Tr. 4/24/2012 pp. 55-62, 80—104; Ex. B—11,B-12, B—15)

The Board’s Director of Special Education interpreted the November 29, 201 1 letter
from ECDS as a statement that ECDS was unable to provide Student’s complete IEP.
(Testimony, Director of Special Education Tr. 4/24/2012 pp. 55—65)

A PPT meeting was scheduled for December 14, 201 1, two weeks aﬁer the letter was
received. That date had been set for a hearing which was cancelled when the request
for hearing was withdrawn. Then this date was proposed for mediation, possibly to
address issues involving Student and her two siblings. Then the Board’s Director of
Special Education proposed that a meeting be held on that date to formalize a list of
issues on which the Palties disagreed, in preparation for mediation. The Director
regarded December 14 as a date on which all parties — Board staff, ECDS staff and

11

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

25.

26.

27.

28.

95, Tr. 4/25/2012 pp. 3-23; Ex. B-14, B-30)

Alternative placements were informally investigated. The notice for the December
14, 2012 PPT meeting did not include the issue of a possible change in placement.
When Parent stated that she would not attend this PPT meeting, the meeting went
forward without her. The ECDS staff members (ECDS Director, Student’s Regular
and Special Education Teachers) and Student’s Current Therapist and Educational
Consultant A gathered in a room at ECDS. The Board’s Director of Special
Education, School Psychologist, and Attorney participated by telephone. The
discussion included possible provision of the after school program at ECDS, rather
than in Student’s home. (Ex. B-12, B-13, B—14, B-16)

The service grid on Student’s December 14, 201 1, IEP showed the following special

education sewices:
Language Arts Instruction 3.00 hr.wk Small group/individual instruction

Math Instruction 2.00 hr.wk Small group/individual instruction
Study skills instruction 0.75 hr.daily Small group/individual instruction
Social studies instmction 1.33 11r.wk IndividuaI instruction

Science instruction 1.33 Inzwk SmalI gI'oup/work with peers

Technology instruction 0.67 hr.wk Small group/work with peers
Counseling Group/individual 10.00 hr monthly Individual instruction
Occupational Therapy 1.00 hr.wk Individual instruction

(Ex. B-l6 pp. 46—47)

Current Therapist, who had been counseling Student for several years, described the

advantages of placement at ECDS for Student:
One of the reasons why [Student] has been thriving is that she’s in a school
that’s essentially populated by kids that are functioning better than she is. The
immersion in social modeling that gives her as an opportunity for growth is
signiﬁcantly positive.

(Testimony, Current Therapist Tr. 3/5/2012 pp. 90)

When the issue of a change of placement arose, it was opposed by ECDS Director
and Student’s ECDS Regu1a1‘ Education Teacher, the Current Therapist and
Educational Consultant A. The two alternative placements offered by the Board were
vigorously attacked by ECDS Staff and various consultants. Several of their reasons
are w01thy of consideration. However, it must be noted that without parental consent,
the Board had been unable to provide documentation of Student’s speciﬁc speciaI
education needs and thereby establish whether such placements were viable.
(Testimony, Testimony Current Therapist, Director ECDS, Educational Consultant B,
Mother; Ex. B—16 pp. 6, B-20, B—21)

12

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

' CUNCEUS’I’WONS’OF'LKWT

1.

Section 10-7611, Connecticut General Statutes (C03), and related regulations at
Section 10-76h, Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, authorize an impartial
hearing ofﬁcer to conduct a special education hearing and to render a ﬁnal decision in
accordance with Sections 4-176e through 4—180a, inclusive, and Sections 4-l8la of
the C.G.S. Section 20 U.S.C. § 1415(f) and related regulations at 34 CPR. §

300.51 1 through § 300.520 also authorize special education hearings. Section 10-
76h(d), C.G.S. authorizes an impartial hearing ofﬁcer to order an evaluation.

The standard for review of special education programs for individual students with
disabilities was established by the US. Supreme Court in the case of Board of
Education oflhe Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 US. 176
(1982). That case established two tests: 1) were the procedural requirements of the
Act complied with; and 2) was the educational program developed for the child
reasonably expected to provide educational beneﬁt.

A signiﬁcant procedural issues raised by Parent is the absence of notice from the
December 6, 201 1, notice for the December 14, 201 l, PPT meeting that a change of
placement might be discussed by the PPT. Another procedural issue was the
convening 0f the December 14, 2011 PPT meeting after Parent had stated that she
would not attend. The Federal regulations focus on the impoitance of parental
participation in these meetings. Given the School District’s experience with this
Parent and the unceitain status of the ECDS placement, it is clear that the Parent
should have been present or the meeting should have been postponed. The letter
dated November 29, 201 1, from ECDS t0 the Board, giving notice that ECDS would
cease to provide some elements of the current IEP, provided notice to the Board that
an emergency situation existed.

At 34 CPR. § 104.35 (a), an evaluation is required prior to an initial special
education placement, and any subsequent signiﬁcant change in placement
(emphasis added.) While the record shows that Parent has been reluctant to consent
for evaluations, citing the emotional fragility of Student, a formal review by the PPT
of Student’s records and a request for consent for limited evaluation ofspeciﬂc areas
is a responsible approach to consideration of a change ofplacement. It is unlikely
that a placement could be found that would duplicate all of the characteristics oflhe
ECDS placement, so the position that the current IEP could be duplicated is
questionable. Any change ofplacement for this child, at this time, could be
considered as significant.

At 34 C.F.R. §300.322 (a) (2), school districts are required to schedule PP'l‘ meetings
at a “mutually agreed on time and place”. While the District’s concerns (the need for
complete implementation of the IEP and prior difﬁculties with scheduling of
meetings with this parent) are real, this meeting should have been postponed to
accommodate the Parent and her Attorney. While the regulations do not address what
is required when parents announces that they will not be attending a scheduled

13

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

to secure the parent’s presence. In this case, where a change in placement was
possible, both the lack of speciﬁc notice and the absence of the Parent were
detrimental to addressing the Student’s special education needs.

Incomplete notice of the PPT agenda and proceeding with the PPT meeting without
Parent in attendance together made it impossible for Parent to respond to proposed
alternative placements for Student, as well as signiﬁcant i'e-structuring of the special
education sewices to be provided. However, both the May and December IEPs were
likely to enable Student to make reasonable educational progress.

The Supreme Couit has held that a unilateral placement by parents of a student in
need of special education in a private school that is not state-approved for special
education placements could be funded by a local school district if a hearing ofﬁcer
determines that the program offered by the school district is not appropriate and the
private school placement is appropriate for that child (F lorence County School
District Four v. Carter, 510 US. 359 (1985)). While the facts of this case are
different, there is no question that the placement at BCDS has been appropriate for
Student. Whether it continues to be appropriate will be determined by the PPT after
the evaluation ordered herein.

. The December 14, 2011, PPT meeting was held at two sites, connected by telephone.
34 CPR. §300.322 (c) and 300.328 suggest use ofa conference telephone call 01‘
video conference as ways to provide for parent paiticipation in meetings. Thus, the
use of telecommunication is not ban‘ed by regulation.

. The IDEA includes strong provisions concerning the rights ofspecial education
students to attend school with non—disabled peers:

o 34 C.F.R. § 300.1 14 (a) (2): (i) To the maximum extent appropriate, children
with disabilities, including children in public or private institutions 01‘ other
care facilities, are educated with children who are nondisabled; and
(ii) Special classes, separate schooling, or other removal of children with
disabilities from the regular educational environment occurs only if the nature
or severity of the disability is such that education in regular classes with the
use of supplementary aids and sewices cannot be achieved satisfactorily.

- 34 C.F.R. § 300.1 16 Placements, (d) In selecting the least restrictive
environment, consideration is given to any harmful effect on the child or on
the quality of sewices that he or she needs; and (e) A child with a disability is
not removed from education in regular classrooms solely because ofneeded
modiﬁcations in the general educational curriculum.

0 34 C.F.R1 300.550(b), special education placement should be to the maximum
extent appropriate [to the student] with students who are not disabled.
Removal from the regular education classroom: “... only when the nature or
severity of the disability of a child is such that education in regular classes
with the use ot‘supplementaiy aids and selyices cannot be achieved
satisfactorily.”

l4

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

10

11.

12,

13.

0f the IEP, providing appropriate behaviors for Student to model.

. From a legal standpoint, if a contracted special education service provider reports to

the public school district that it cannot provide the full IEP (for whatever reason,
including funding) the school district MUST act to remedy the situation An obvious
response is to seek an alternative placement that will be able to implement the IEP.
in order to learn whether an alternative placement can implement the IEP, the school
district must have parental consent to disclose the IEP to possible alternative
placements.

The role of individualized evaluations in determining the need for special education
and at least every three years, in reviewing the special education program and the
student’s performance and progress, is a fundamental component of IDEA.

34 CPR. §300.303 Reevaluations

(b) Limitation. A reevaluation conducted under paragraph (a) of this section -

(1) May occur not more than once a year, unless the parent and the [school] agree

otherwise; and

(2) Must occur at least every 3 years, unless the parent and the [school] agree that

a reevaluation is unnecessary.

At Section 10-220 (a), C.G.S., the Board of Education is given the authority to hire
and assign teachers and other school staff members. While parents may comment of
selection and performance of school staff members, they may not dictate the
assignment of staff members. The Board has the legal authority to provide IEP
sewices by school staff members or, when appropriate, contract for such services.
The decision to provide OT services by a properly licensed OT who can provide the
services on site and collaborate with Student’s teachers is both legally allowed and
practical.

At Sioux Falls School District v. Koupal, 22 IDELR 26, South Dakota Supreme Comt
1994, the cotut held that prior IEP services did not require continuation of such
sewices in later IEPs. While similar lEPs and placement may continue over several
years, an annual review is required by 34 C.F.R. § 300.324 (b) (i): [the IEP Team]
“Reviews the child’s IEP periodically, but no less than annuallyt . .”

DISCUSSION

The Board’s PPT devised a creative program and placement for Student, who was
struggling with life—threatening medical issues and some degree of school phobia in
addition to an Autism Spectrum Disorder, OCD and anxiety. Placement at ECDS with
her brothers, with counseling by a dedicated professional, was successful in that she is
now attending classes with many non—disabled peers and appears to enjoy school. It is
understandable that Student’s Parent and the professionals who have contributed to her
school attendance and performance are reluctant to risk a full evaluation and possible

15

 

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

 

changes in her IEP and/or placement. However, without some current data, it is difﬁcult
to determine whether she needs more of the same, or either a more specialized program
or return to a public school program. No one has suggested that she is no longer eligible
for special education.

The Board has little current evaluative data for this Student. While it has been argued
that testing might exacerbate her anxiety and lead to setbacks in her progress, it is
important to determine some basic facts about her academic progress, Approximate
measures of her grade levels in maj 01‘ subjects (reading, writing and math) are overdue
for consideration of her IEP and special education placement. It is likely that some of the
needed information may be obtained from her records. Some standardized testing, in a
comfmtable place with support from people she trusts, is not unreasonable.

Since it is theoretically possible for Parent’s lack of consent to evaluate to freeze the
placement at ECDS, it is essential that such an evaluation be ordered. It is possible that
in addition to reducing the amount of testing normally performed in a triennial evaluation
and providing accommodations and the presence of a familiar person such as a teacher 01~
her Current Therapist, a few of Student’s classmates taking the tests at the same time
might make her more comfortable.

Student’s Current Therapist and a Board psychologist can gather as much data as is
currently available and through the PPT process design a minimal evaluation that will
show where Student is in terms of grade level and what, if any, psychiatric diagnosis 01'
diagnoses, are appropriate. Such an evaluation will undoubtedly include some
standardized testing. Student would need to be prepared for that testing and supported
appropriately during the testing, and such accommodations should be recorded so that the
test results can be considered with knowledge of testing conditions.

Student’s Current Therapist shall assist the PPT, including Student’s Parents, in selecting
appropriate evaluators and in designing arrangements for test administration that will
minimize stress for the Student. The evaluators must be appropriately certiﬁed and/or
licensed in the State of Connecticut and without prior contact with the Student.
Evaluations may be given at a site that is comfonable for the Student, and the Current
Therapist may assist in preparing her and/or accompany her at the testing location.

Pending completion of these steps, the Student shall remain at ECDS. The contract
between the Board and ECDS shall include the services agreed to in the May 201 l IEP,
appropriately funded.

After the reports ofevaluations and prior relevant records have been gathered, the PPT

shall convene to consider the Student’s IEP and placement. Among the questions to be

considered are:

o Is the Student ready to return to a public school setting, with appropriate suppons?

- Is the Student in need of a more specialized placement, as proposed at the December
14, 2011, PPT?

0 Should the Student continue where she is, at ECDS?

16

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

Flinn a legalistandpoint,ri"fa eontracted special education seiyiéreﬂpi'oyidér 'ie’ponrs terthe N

public school district that it cannot provide all IEP services (for whatever reasons,
including funding) the school district MUST act to remedy the situation and assure that
the IEP is being fully implemented. One reasonable response from the school district is
consideration of a change of placement. In order to discuss possible enrollment, the
school district must obtain parental consent to release the student’s IEP to prospective
alternative placements. When a parent blocks legally appropriate PPT actions by
withholding consent, a special education hearing ofﬁcer has the authority to override lack
of consent.

Pursuant to the ruling in Connecticut Special Education Hearing No. 1 10561, the Board
has the right to select evaluators as well as related service providers such as OTs.
Whether to select regular board staff members or to contract with outside providers is
also the right ofthe Board and its administrative designees. Parents may make
suggestions, but ultimately Connecticut state law resewes the right to hire and assign
staff to the Board.

Problems concerning the contracts between the Board and ECDS and payment
arrangements are not directly within the scope of authority of a special education hearing
ofﬁcer, and the Board’s objections to documents and testimony on these topics were
reasonable. However, implementation of an IEP is at the healt of many special education
hearings, including this one. Problems concerning contracts (or lack of timely contracts)
or funding for contractual services may imperil implementation of an IEP, and that is
within the authority of a hearing officer. Some, if not all, of the difﬁculties discussed in
this hearing could have been avoided if the contract between the Board and ECDS for
Student’s placement in 2011-2012 had been executed in a timely manner.

17

May 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 12-0216

1.

FINAL DECISIONAND ORDER:

The May 17, 201 1, IEP was appropriate to Student’s special education needs in the
least restrictive enviromnent through the end of the current school year, 2011-2012.

The December 14, 201 1, IEP, though quite different in service format, was also
appropriate to Student’s special education needs.

With the assistance of Student’s Current Therapist and a Board school psychologist,
the PPT shall plan a triennial evaluation following the general outline discussed
above. Timely information from Student’s education record may be used, as well as
standardized testing in selected areas, with appropriate supports for Student.

When the evaluation has been completed, the PPT shall convene to discuss Student’s
current status, to review and revise Student’s IEP and to determine whether a change
of placement is appropriate at this time.

The failure to provide notice that a change of placement was under consideration and
the Board’s unwillingness to re-schedule the PPT meeting that was held on December
14, 2011, were procedural errors that prevented Parent from full patticipation in the
PPT.

The overriding fact that Student can model behavior from non-disabled peers at
ECDS makes that placement preferable to a placement in which all students are
disabled to some degree and many have behavioral issues.

Based on the limited information available and lack 01’ an oppommity for either of the
two proposed, state-appi'oved private school placements to see Student’s IEP, it is
doubtful that either was appropriate for Student at the time.

The ESY provided by the Board in the summer of 201] was appropriate to Student’s
special education needs.

The Board holds the legal authority to select and assign appropriately

certiﬁed/licensed personnel to implement Student’s IEP. Thus, the Board may select
the provider of OT services to Student

18

