STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Case No. 12-0045 Date of Decision: September 23, 201 1

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf ot‘the Parents: Attorney Jennifer Laviano

76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler

Town of Greenwich
Law Depattment

101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Ofﬁcer

ISSUES:

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

Whether the Board failed to offer the Student FAPE for the 2009—10 and 2010-1 1
school years, including ESY and related services, because it failed to
appropriately identify the Student’s academic and social needs, and to provide a
program that effectively addressed those needs.

. Whether the Board denied the Student FAPE for the 201 1~12 school year,

including ESY and related services, because it failed to offer or provide a program
that was designed to meet her individual academic and social needs, contained a
sufﬁcient level of direct instmction, structure and intensity to meet those needs,
and that was reasonably calculated to enable her to obtain educational beneﬁt.

. Whether the Board violated its Child Find obligations in its actions with the

Student.

. Whether the Board denied the Student FAPE for the 2009~10, 2010-1 1 and 201 1—

12 school years by Violating her procedural safeguards including failing to
comprehensively re-evaluate the Student in all known and suspected areas of
disability, failing to perform triennial evaluations, failing to consider the Parents”
input in the development of the IEP, failing to consider the information provided

by the Parents to the PPT, failing to offer EYS services and applying inaccurate
standard to the provision of those services, failing to conduct an assistive
technology evaluation despite the recommendations of Dr. Koda and failing to
maintain a continuum of appropriate alternative placements.

5. Whether the Parents’ proposed placement of the Student at Franklin Academy is
appropriate and shall be reimbursed.

6. Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for all costs associated with the Student’s
residential placement at Franklin Academy for the poxtion of the 2010-1 1 school
year that the Student attended Franklin.

7. Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for all other expenses incurred as a result
of the Board’s failure to provide or offer a FAPE, including the
neuropsychological evaluation conducted by Dr. Koda, tutoring, and related and
ESY sewices and programs.

8. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

This request for hearing was received by the Board 011 July 28, and a preheating conference
convened on August 8. The mailing date was extended to provide the parties with additional
time to attempt to settle the case through mediation. A mediation session was convened on
September 2] .

On September 22, the Parents’ attorney submitted notiﬁcation that the parties participated in
mediation and have agreed to seek an outside evaluation which will take some time. The Parents

requested that the matter be withdrawn without prejudice. Therefore, this case is dismissed,
without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

