Date: February 22, 2013 Final Decision and Order: 13-0252

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Appearing on behalfol‘the Parent: Parent, Pro se

Appearing on behalt‘ofthe Board: Attorney Linda Yodcr
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Robett L. Skelley, Esq,
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

The Board repmted that an agreement had been reached prior to the holding of the
Pre—hearing Conference, thus no issues were identiﬁed and agreed upon by the Parties.

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY:

The complaint was ﬁled on December 10, 2012 by the Parent. The date for the
ﬁnal decision and order was originally set for February 22, 2013.

Prior to the Pre-hearing Conference being held and issues identiﬁed, Dr. Bremner,
acting for the East Hartford Board of Education (“Board”), emailed the State Depaltment
of Education, who then forwarded a document to the Hearing Officer, a document
purpoﬁing to be an agreement between the Parties. The document is signed by Dr,
Bretnner and purportedly the Parent, The agreement is reported to have been reached
through the resolution process, and in paIt, calls for the self—represented Parent to rescind
the hearing request To date the Hearing Ofﬁcer has not received any communication
from the Parent rescinding the hearing request 01' for any further steps.

On February 19, 2013 this Hearing Ofﬁcer gave notice to the Parties that absent a
written withdrawal of the complaint by the Parent, which was required as part 01‘ the
resolution agreement provided to the Hearing Ofﬁcer; a Due Process Hearing was
scheduled for February 22, 2013. The Palties were instructed that providing the written
withdrawal by close 01‘ business on February 20, 2013 would subsequently cancel the
Due Process Hearing. No withdrawal was received by the Hearing Ofﬁcer and the
hearing was held on February 22, 2013‘

The Parent did not appear for the Due Process hearing.

Date: February 22, 2013 Final Decision and Order: 13~0252

The Board was represented by Attorney Linda Yodcr. The Board presented one witness,
Dr. Sharon A. Bremner, Director ot‘Pupil Personnel Services (“Din”) for the East
Hartford Board of Education.

Dix: testiﬁed that on December 18, 2012 the Board held a resolution meeting with the
Parent and that a resolution was reached. That resolution was presented as Board Exhibit
#1 and was accepted as a full exhibit.

Dir. funher testiﬁed that the Board had attempted to obtain a written withdrawal from the
Parent and that the Parent had refused to provide a written withdrawal, claiming that the
Board Exhibit #1 was her withdrawal,

Dir. testiﬁed that she had made sure the Parent was notiﬁed of the Due Process Hearing
scheduled for today, and that the Parent was aware and notiﬁed.

Dir. stated that she had attempted to ﬁnd out if the Parent was located in the building for
the hearing but was unable to locate the Parent.

Dir. stated that despite the Parent not providing the written withdrawal, the Board
intended to proceed with the resolution agreement as agreed and that they believed that
the Parent was satisﬁed with the agreement and the services being provided as a result of
the agreement.

There were no fuﬂher witnesses. The Hearing Ofﬁcer entered the Complaint and the
Hearing Officer appointment as exhibits HO #1 and HO#2 respectively.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled. To
the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed herein, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit,

To the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. For reference, see SAS
Institute, Inc, v. S & H ComputerSyslems, Inc, 605 F.Supp. 816 (MD, Tenn. 1985) and
Bonnie Ann F. v. Ca/allen Independent School Districl, 835 F.Supp‘ 340, 20 IDELR 736
(SD. Tex. 1993).

SUMMARY:

The Student is enrolled in the East Hartford Public Schools. The Parent tiled a
complaint on December 10, 2012, a resolution meeting was held on December 18, 2012
in which a resolution to the complaint was reached and reduced to writing. No formal
written withdrawal was provided by the Parent. A Due Process Hearing was held on
Febmary 22, 2013 in which the Board witness testiﬁed as to the written agreement being
accepted by both the Board and the Parent and that the Board was proceeding to
implement that agreement and would continue to do so.

2

Date: February 22, 2013 Final Decision and Order: 13—0252

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(C.G.S.) §10—76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act
(U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-1766 t0 4-178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4—186,

FINDINGS OF FACT:

. The Student is enrolled in the East Hartford Public Schools

2. The Parent ﬁled a complaint on December 10, 2012.

31 A resolution meeting was held on December 18, 2012, in which a written
resolution was reached between the Palties.

4. The intent of the Parties was to have the written resolution, Board Exhibit #1,
resolve the complaint of the Parent.

5. The Board is complying with the resolution agreement and intends to continue to
do so despite the failure of the Parent to provide a separate written withdrawal of
the complaint as required in the resolution agreement.

6. The Parent (who was not present) did not provide any witnesses or exhibits that

were contrary to the belief that the resolution agreement was accepted by both

paities and intended to resolve the complaint.

..‘

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1. The standard for review of special education programs for individual students with
disabilities was established by the US. Supreme Court in the case 01‘ Board of
Education oflhe Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 U .S. 176
(1982). That case established two tests: 1) were the procedural requirements of the
Act complied with; and 2) was the educational program developed for the child
reasonably expected to provide educational beneﬁt.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

Based upon the written resolution agreement provided in evidence, and the
testimony of the Board witness that the Parties reached agreement and that agreement
was in effect and intended to resolve the complaint, I ﬁnd that there are no other issues
before the Hearing Ofﬁcer and that the complaint was withdrawn through the written
resolution agreement. This matter is dismissed without prejudice

