August 2, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13~0580

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Bridgeport Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Susan C Freedman
Attorney Gwen J. Zittoun
Shipman & Goodwin LLl’
One Constitution Plaza
Hanford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Ann F. Bird, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Did the Bridgeport Board of Education discriminate against the Student?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student’s Parent ﬁled this due process case on June 27, 2013. This Impartial Hearing
Ofﬁcer was appointed to the matter on June 27, 2013. Attorneys Susan Freedman and Gwen
Zittoun appeared on behalf of the Board of Education, A prehearing conference was attempted
on July 17, 2013 pursuant to a notice sent to the parties Via U ,8. Mail. This Impaltial Hearing
Ofﬁcer was, however, unable to conduct the preheating conference because the telephone
number provided for the Student’s Parent was no longer in service

The Board of Education provided a second possible telephone number for the Student’s Parent.
The second possible telephone number, however, was also not in service. On July 24, 2013, a
second Notice of Prehearing Conference (Notice) was mailed to the address provided for the
Parent, scheduling a conference for July 31, 2013 at 9:30 a.m.. This Notice included the
following speciﬁc message to the parent: “You must contact me with a working telephone
number that 1 can use to call you for the preheating conference no later than the day and time of
the conference!”

The Parent did not respond to the Notice or contact this Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer. Neither the
Notice nor any other communication was returned to the lmpaﬁial Hearing Ofﬁcer as
undelivered to the Parent.

On July 15, 2013, the Board of Education ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss 0n the grounds that the
Impaltial Hearing Ofﬁcer lacks jurisdiction over the substance of the complaint and that the
Student’s Parent has no standing to ﬁle the case because the Student is over twenty-one years of

August 2, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0580

age and has a plenary guardian other than the Parent The Board of Education’s Motion to
Dismiss was also sent to the Parent as well as to the Student’s plenary guardian via U.St Mail,

The Parent did not respond 01' object to the Board of Education’s Motion to Dismiss.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Parent’s request for due process is dismissed without prejudice.

