January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0055

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board 01‘ Education

Appearing on behalfol‘lhe Student: Attorney Gerry McMahon
The Law Ofﬁces ot‘Gerry McMahon, LLC
98 M111 Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT 06811

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler
Assistant Town Attorney
Town of Greenwich
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Catherine M. Spain
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

 

1. Did the Board err in concluding that the Student was ineligible for special education
services for the 2012~2013 school year?

2. Ifso, is the Parents’ unilateral placement at Windward School appropriate and
reimbursable?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by the Student’s
attorney and received by the Board on July 30, 2012‘ A pre—hearing conference was held by
telephone on August 9, 2012. The thirty-day resolution period ran through August 29, 2012.
Hearings were held on October 2, 5, 23 and 24, November 28 and December 4, 2012. By way of
motions for extensions, which were granted to accommodate hearing dates and the submission of
briefs, the decision deadline was extended to January 8, 2012. On the ﬁnal day of hearing; the
Parents requested withdrawal of the issues addressing the provision ofa free appropriate public
education during the 201 1-2012 school year. Hearing no objection from the Board, the
undersigned hearing ofﬁcer granted the Parents’ motion to withdraw the issues pertaining to the
201 1-2012 school year. Post—hearing briefs were submitted by both parties on December 14,
2012.

January 3. 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0055

SUMMARY:

The Student experienced difﬁculty with reading while enrolled as a ﬁrst-grader at her district
school in Greenwich. The Parents expressed concern about the Student’s lack of progress in
reading, as well as her i'eading-t'elated anxiety, to her classroom teacher. The classroom teacher,
after observing the Student’s lack of progress in word recognition, referred the Student to the
school’s student assistance team/response to intervention team, which resulted in the Student’s
receiving specialized reading instruction thrice per week from the school’s reading specialist.
The classroom teacher also supplemented the Student’s regular instruction with extra language—
based instruction during the school day.

In spite ofthese interventions, and private tutoring twice per week, the Student’s struggles with
reading continued. The Parents expressed their concern about the Student’s lack of progress in
reading to the classroom teacher, the reading specialist, and the school principal. 1n the spring,
the Parents hired a private evaluator, who concluded that the Student suffers from a reading
disorder. The Parents requested a Planning and Placement Team meeting and submitted to the
school a Form 621 Referral for Special Education and Related Services. During the Planning
and Placement Team meeting, the school members of the team deemed the Student ineligible for
special education and related services. After ﬁling for due process, the Parents informed the
Board that the Student would be attending the Windward School for the 2012—20] 3 school year,

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

In accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act and Connecticut General Statutes
(“C,G.S.”) §4-176e through §4-178, this matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to 20
United States Code (“U.S.C.”) §1415(f) and its related regulations and pursuant to C.G.S. §10—
76h and its related regulations.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student, currently a sec0nd~grader at the Windward School, formerly attended
Riverside School (“the school”) in Greenwich.

2. During her ﬁrst-grade year at the school, the Student experienced difﬁculties in learning
to read. (Testimony of Mother)

3. The Student’s mother noticed these difﬁculties and discussed them with Sheri McGowan,
the Student’s classroom teacher. (Exh. P-33; Testimony of Mother)

4. The Student had difﬁculty in recognizing words and letter sounds. Due to the Student’s
weaknesses, Ms. McGowan referred her to Riverside School’s student assistance
team/response to intewention team (“SAT/RTI”) by submitting an SAT Data Preparation
Form. (Testimony of Ms. McGowan; Exh. P-25)

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0055

10,

111

12.

13.

15.

The question posed by Ms. McGowan on the SAT Data Preparation Form dated
November 17, 201 1 is “Why is [Student]’s rate of progress so slow?” On the form, Ms.
McGowan listed as the Student’s weaknesses her lack of retention of letter sounds, sight
words and spelling. (Exh. B—S)

As a result of the SAT/RTI referral, the Student began meeting with Lynn Sterner,
Riverside School’s reading specialist, who provided the Student scientiﬁc, researeh—based
intervention (“SRBI”) three times per week. (Exh. B-9)

Mrs. Sterner did not beiieve that interventions were needed for the Student, whose
reading level, according to school records, was on grade level at the begiiming 0f the
school year. (Testimony of Lynn Sterner)

In January, the Parents informed school personnel that they had hired a tutor, who began
in December, to assist the Student with her reading. (Testimony of Mother)

John Grasso, the School Principal, sent the Parents a letter dated January 30, 2012
updating them on the Student’s SRBI plan. According to the letter, the Student’s word
practice in school would be intensiﬁed because the Student was showing “inconsistency
in her ability to recognize sight words and high frequency words.” (Exh. P—34)

The Student was increasingly frustrated and anxious about her reading. ('l‘estimony of
Mother)

Throughout the year, the Parents continued to express their concern about the Student’s
lack of progress in reading to the classroom teacher, the reading specialist, and the school
principal. (Exh. 13-3)

111 the spring, the Parents hired Dr. J ill Greenbcrg to evaluate the Student. The Student
was evaluated over the course ofsix sessions by Dr. Greenberg, who concluded that the
student suffers from a reading disorder that adversely affects her ability to learn. (Exh.
B—3; Testimony ofDr, Greenberg)

Dr. Greenberg administered several reading tests, including the reading component of the
Wechsler Individual Achievement Test, the Gray Oral Reading Test (GORT—V), the Test
01‘ Phonological Processing (C~TOPP) and the Slingerland Screening for Identifying
Children with Speciﬁc Language Disability (Exh, B-3)

t The Student’s reading rate, accuracy and ﬂuency on the GORT—V were well below

average (Exh‘ B—3; Testimony of Dr. Greenberg)

Because the GORT test does not have any picture cues and requires the student to
manipulate reading rate, ﬂuency, accuracy and comprehension at the same time, it is a true
composite ol'the student as a readeiz (Testimony ot‘Mst Matera)

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0055

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

On the C-TOPP, the Student scored well below average on two rapid—naming tasks.
(Exh. B—3; Testimony of Dr. Greenberg)

On the Slingerland Screening, the Student made twenty—seven mistakes total, eleven 01'
them involving reading reversals. Any number above eleven mistakes total on the
Slingerland Screening indicates a learning disability. (Exh, B-3; Testimony 01‘ Dr,
Greenbcrg)

The Student failed to make a connection between vowels and vowel sounds, (Testimony
ot‘Dr. Greenberg)

The Student became highly agitated when asked to read, a negative emotional response
that is atypical of a student making steady progress. (Testimony of Dr. Greenberg)

The Student’s learning disability and related anxiety impair her ability to learn in school.
(Testimony of Dr. Greenberg)

On June 12, 2012, the Parents submitted to Principal Grasso and Mary Forde, Director 01‘
Pupil Personnel Services, a Referral to Determine Eligibility for Special Education and
Related Sewices, State of Connecticut Depanment ofEducation Form 621, in order to
determine the Student’s eligibility for special education and related services, as well as a
letter in which they requested that a referral PPT (“Planning and Placement Team”)
meeting be scheduled. (Exh. B-6)

The Fountas & Pimiell system used by the school indicates that ﬁrst—grade students begin
at approximately level “13” and progress to approximately level “.1,” on average. School
records represent that the Student began her ﬁrst-grade school year in the “on grade
level” range (a F ountas & Pimiell “D,” where “on grade level” at the start of the year is
“D, E and F ”), but ﬁnished the year below grade—level (a Fountas & Pinnell “H,” where
“on grade level” at the end of the year is “l, J or K”) in spite of SRBI, private tutoring,
and supplemental instruction from her ﬁrst-grade teacher.l (Exh. P—46; Exh. B8)

011 June 19, a PPT meeting convened. According to the school’s meeting summary
report, “the purpose ot‘the meeting was to review the parent referral for special education
eligibility and consider the initiated private evaluation.” At the meeting, the Parents
presented the evaluation report ot‘Dr. Gi‘eenberg, who was present at the meeting. Ms,
McGowan reported that the Student was reading at Fountas & PinneI] “H” level, below
benchmark, but that she had learned a list of one hundred “sight words,” exceeding the
benchmark of eighty—eight words. Mrs. Sterner rcponed on her sessions with the Student,
and provided the Parents books with which the Student could practice her reading
ﬂuency. The School Psychologist reported that the Student demonstrates strong social

IThe school’s assistant principal mistakenly stated, and the June 19, 2012 IEP meeting summary
erroneously states, that the Student began the year at the “B” level. In fact, as Ms. McGowan and M54
Sterner testiﬁed, the Student was tested in the fall at the “D” level. (Exh. P-46; Testimony ost.
McGowan and Ms. Sterner)

4

 

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0055

24.

25.

26.

27.

281

29.

30.

31.

32.

skills and was chosen to participate in a snack group meant to assist other students with
their social skills. (Exh. B—1)

Even while acknowledging that Dr. Greenberg’s report states that the Student has
“executive ﬁtnetioning issues [and] weakness in far point copying, reversals, and
negative emotions around reading,” the PPT did not offer to evaluate the Student. In
sum, “The school members of the team considered the private evaluation, [the Student’s}
response to 'mtewention and current functioning and determined that [the Student] does
not meet the criteria for disability under the IDEA [Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act].” (Exh. B—l; Testimony of Riverside Assistant Principal Marianne
McCullough and School Psychologist June Gold; Exh. B-46)

1n reaching its conclusion that the Student was ineligible for special education and related
sewices, the PPT relied heavily on data provided by the reading specialist and on the fact
that the Student had progressed to a Fountas & Pinne11 “H” level in reading over the
course of the school year. The PPT also relied on the Student’s improvement in learning
the list of “sight words.” (Testimony of Riverside Assistant Principal Marianne
McCullough and School Psychologist June Gold; EXh. B—46)

On July 30, the Board received the Parents“ Request for Due Process, which proposed
that the Board reimburse the Parents for their unilateral placement of the Student at
Windward School. (Exh. Hearing Ofﬁcer-l; Testimony 01‘ Mother)

Windward School is a private school in White Plains, New York, that specializes in
instructing students with language—based learning disabilities. (Testimony of Dr.
Greenberg)

On June 22, 2012, Windward School personnel conducted testing of the Student. Even
though she was at the end of her ﬁrst-grade year, the Student performed below the ﬁrst-
grade level on the GORT~IV in rate, accuracy, ﬂuency and comprehension. (Exh. P-19)

Windward School personnel concluded that the Student has a language—based learning
disability. (Exh. P~47)

The Parents informed the Board in a letter dated August 13, 2012 that the Student wou1d
attend Windward instead of Riverside School for the 2012-2013 school year. (Exh. B—6)

Dr. Greenberg, who is not afﬁliated with Windward School, testiﬁed that the Student
would beneﬁt both academically and emotionally from the education offered there.
(Testimony ol'Dr. Grecnbcrg)

In September of 2012, the Parents hired Dawn Matera, an independent learning
disabilities specialist, to evaluate the Student. Based on her evaluation of the Student,
Ms. Matera testiﬁed that there is “no doubt that there needs to be some direct instruction
for the language-based reading disability.” (Testimony of Ms. Matel'a)

S

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0055

33.

34.

35.

36.

The Student can be seen in a video, which was recorded at the end of September 2012
and to which the Board did not object being entered as an exhibit, attempting to read
Club Monster, a Fountas & Pilmell “H’llevel book, which, according to her teachers at
the school, was a level she had mastered by J une of 2012. The Student can read very
little of the three and one-halfpages she attempts. She reverses letters frequently, for
example, reading “monsters” as “mountains” and “snag” as “song.” The Student then
complains that she is tired and does not want to continue. (Exh. P~18)

Msi Matera testiﬁed that the Student was categorized at the school as being at a reading
level above her actual level. (Testimony ost. Matei'a)

Dr. Greenberg and Ms. Matera both testiﬁed that the Student has developed strategies
with which to compensate for her reading difﬁculties. One such strategy is discerning the
meaning ofa story from pictures. Another is memorization, which could have
contributed to the Student’s eventual success with the list of “sight words” learned by
rote, (Testimony of Dr. Greenbcrg, Tr. 10/23/12; Testimony osti Matera)

Ms. Matera, who is not afﬁliated with Windward School, testiﬁed that it would be “a
most appropriate placement” for the Student. (Testimony of Ms. Matei'a)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”), 20 U.S.C. § 1400, et seq, was
enacted to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free
appropriate public education (“FAPE”) that emphasizes special education and related
sewices designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education,
employment, and independent living. 20 U.S.C. § l400(d)(1)(A). Related services
include the cost oftravel t0 and from school. 34 C.]“.R. §300.34(c)(l6); Regulations 01‘
Connecticut State Agencies (“RCSA”) § 10—76d-19.

A child with a disability is a child evaluated in accordance with §§ 300.304 through
300.31 1 as having any of several disabilities, including a speciﬁc learning disability, and
who, by reason thereof, needs special education and related services. 34 CPR.
§300.8(a).

IDEA requires participating states to educate a wide spectrum ot‘disabled children, NC}.
v. District Q/‘Columbia, 556 F.Supp.2d 1 1, 16 (2008). To meet this goal, all public
education agencies are required to have in effect policies and procedures to ensure that all
children with disabilities residing in the State, “l'egai'dless 01‘ the severity of their
disability, and who are in need of special education and related services, are identiﬁed,
located and evaluated and a practical method is developed and implemented to determine
which children are currently receiving needed special education and related sewices. 2O
U.S.C.§ 1412(a)(3)(A).” Id.

This mandate is known as the “child ﬁnd” obligation, an afﬁrmative obligation ol‘every
public school system to identify students who might be disabled and evaluate those

6

 

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0055

10.

ll.

12.

13.

students to determine whether they are indeed eligible. NG. v. District Q/‘Co/umbia, 556
F.Supp.2d at 161 “[T]he Child Find obligation extends to all children suspected of having
a disability, not merely to those students who are ultimately determined to be disabled.
34 CPR. §300.111(c)(1)1” N.G. v. Dislricl ofColumbia, 556 F.Supp.2d at 25.

Presented with Dr. Greenberg’s evaluation, Ms. McGowan’s referral of the Student to the
SAT/RTI team, John Grasso’s January 30, 2012 letter to the Parents, and the Student’s
failure to reach the first~grade benchmark in reading, the PPT was clearly on notice that
the Student was suspected ofhaving a learning disability.

Futthermore, presented with the Parent’s June 12, 2012 Form 621, the PPT was clearl y
on notice ot‘the Parents’ request for an evaluation. Form 621 states on its face: “it
should be understood that, in all instances, this is a referral for an evaluation to
determine eligibility for special education services, Actual eligibility for special
education services is determined by the PPT only after an evaluation has been
completed.” (Emphasis added, Exh. B-6)

Connecticut regulations provide that “[ejach board 01‘ education shall accept and process
referrals from appropriate school personnel, as well as from a child’s parents, in order to
determine a child’s eligibility for special education and related services.” RCSA § 10-
76d-7.

Furthermore, “[ejach child who has been referred and who may require special education
and related services shall be evaluated in order to determine whether special education is
required” RCSA§ 10~76d—9,

Form 621 and Connecticut regulations are consistent with federal law, which provides
that either a parent ot‘a child or a public agency may initiate a request for an initial
evaluation to determine if the child is a child with a disability. 20 U .S.C. §
1414(a)(1)(B); 34 C.F.R. § 300.301(b).

“Once potentially disabled students are identiﬁed and located, the local educational
agency must conduct an evaluation to determine whether the child is a child with a
disability. 20 U.S.C. § 1414(b)(2)(A)(i),” NG. V. District quolumbia, 556 FiSupp.2d
at 16.

Although a PPT’s refusal to evaluate a student may be reasonable where a parent’s
referral is baseless, this is not such a case.

In this case, the PPT erred when, without evaluating the Student, it summarily deemed
her ineligible for special education and related services,

Data collected by the classroom teacher and the reading specialist, on which the Board
relied, (lid not constitute an educational evaluation of the Student “In conducting the
evaluation, the local educational agency shall use a variety ot‘assessment tools and

7

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0055

15.

17.

18.

19.

20.

strategies to gather relevant functional, developmental, and academic information,
including information provided by the parent, that may assist in determining whether the
child is disabled under the Act.” (Internal quotation marks omitted) N.G. V. District of
Columbia, 556 F.Supp.2d at 16. See 20 U,S.C. § 1414(b)(2)(A)(i) and RCSA § 10—76(1—
9(a) and (b).

. The Board’s claim that the Student’s progress in recognizing a list of “sight words”

proves her ineligibility for special education is ﬂawed. As previously stated, the Student
has developed strategies to compensate for her reading difﬁculties. One such strategy is
memorization, which explains the Student’s mastery ofa word list learned by rote. Dr.
Greenberg stated, “When she was confronted with information that’s over—teamed which
is something she sees and does eveiy day, her performance was in the average range."
(Testimony of Dr. Greenberg)

The credible testimony of Ms. Matcra and Dr. Greenberg, and the compelling evidence
presented during the due process hearing, including the video, evince that the Student
could not read even at the Fountas & Piimell H level.

i As such, the Board’s claim that the Student’s reading progressed to the H level is

erroneous.

I therefore conclude, based on the strong evidence presented, including the Student’s lack
ofprogress in reading, Dix Gl'eenbei'g’s rcpolt and credible testimony, and the credible
testimony of Ms. Matera and Ms. McGowan, who identiﬁed the Student’s lack of
progress in November of 201 1, that the Student suffers from a 1anguage~based disability
that adversely affects her ability to 1eam and that requires specialized instruction.

As such, the Student is eligible for special education and related services under the
special education category “speciﬁc learning disability.” “Speciﬁc learning disability
means a disorder in one 01' more 01‘ the basic psychological processes involved in
understanding 01' in using language, spoken or written, that may manifest itself in the
imperfect ability to listen, think, speak, read, write, spell, or 10 do mathematical
calculations, including conditions such as perceptual disabilities, brain injury, minimal
brain dysfunction, dyslexia, and developmental aphasia.” 34 CPR. § 300,8(c)(10)i

Accordingly, the Student qualiﬁes for and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate
public education (“FAPE”) in the teast restrictive environment (“LRE”), with special
education and related services under the provisions ot‘state and federal laws. Connecticut
General Statutes §§10-76 et seq; 20 USC. § 1400, ct seq.; 34 CFR. § 300.1(a); 34
CPR. § 300.17. 1

The Board failed to offer the Student the FAPE to which she was entitled for the 2012~
2013 school year.

 

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0055

21. The Parents have demonstrated that Windward School, which specializes in instructing
students with language-based learning disabilities, and which is fully accredited by the
State of New York Education Department, provides an appropriate educational placement
for the Student.

22, The parents shall be reimbursed, for a reading 01‘ IDEA that would leave parents without
an adequate remedy when a school district unreasonably fails to identify a child with
disabilities “would not eomport with Congress’ acknowledgement of the paramount
importance ofproperly identifying each child eligible for services.” F ares! Grove School
District Vi TA, 557 US. 230, 245 (2009). “When a child requires special—education
services, a school district’s failure to propose an IEP of any kind is at least as serious a
violation of its responsibilities under IDEA as a failure to provide an adequate IEPi” Id.
at 238—39. IDEA authorizes reimbursement for the cost ot‘private special-education
services when a school district fails to provide a FAPE and the private-school placement
is appropriate, regardless of whether the child previously received special education or
related services through the public school. 1d. at 247, RCSA §10-76h—14. “Without the
remedy [sought] . . . a child’s right to a free appropriate education . l . would be less than
complete.” (Internal citations omitted) Id. at 244-45,

23. The cost of reimbursement may be reduced or denied in cases where the parents did not
inform the public agency that they were rejecting the placement proposed by the public
agency, including stating their concerns and their intent to enroll their child in a private
school at public expense, at least ten days prior to the removal of the child from the
public school, 34 C.F.R. §300.148(d)(1).

24. In this case, the Parents provided the Board with at least ten days’ notice prior to the
removal of the Student from the school. Although the Board has not disputed that the
Parents provided adequate notice, I clarify for the record that on July 30, the Board
received the Parents’ Request for Due Process, which proposed that the Board reimburse
the Parents for their unilateral placement of the Student at Windward School. The
Parents also informed the Board in a letter dated August 13, 2012 that the Student would
attend Windward instead of Riverside School for the 2012—2013 school year. The
Student’s removal from the school was effective August 28, 2012, the first day oi‘the
2012—2013 school year for the Greenwich Public Schools. (Exh. Hearing Ofﬁcer-l; Exh.
13—6)

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The evidence presented during the course of this hearing proves that the Student suffers
from a language-based speciﬁc learning disability which adversely affects her learning
and which requires specialized instruction. The PP'J' thus erred in failing to evaluate the
Student and in concluding that she was ineligible for special education and related
services. Accordingly, the Board shall reimburse the Parents for 1) the Student’s full
2012—2013 tuition at the Windward School; 2) the cost of obtaining Dr. Greenberg’s
evaluation; 3) the cost of obtaining Ms. Matera’s evaluation, and 4) transportation costs

9

 

January 3, 2013 . Final Decision and Order 13—0055

to and from the Windward School for the 2012—2013 school year, as deﬁned pursuant to
34 CPR. §300,34(c)(16). No other costs shall be paid by the Board.

10

 

