May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No, 13—0162

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Southington Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney David Shaw
Law Ofﬁce of David Shaw

34 Jerome Avenue, Suite 210
Bloomﬁeld, CT 06002

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chinni & Meuser
30 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES

1. Was the change, if any, to the Student’s program on October 3, 2012 in compliance with the law?
2. Is the program provided from October 3, 2012 in compliance with the law?

3. If not, what is the appropriate remedy, if any?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Southington Board of Education (“BOB”) received the Student’s Request for Impartial Due Process
Hearing on October 2, 2012. A prehearing conference was conducted on October 9, 2012. At that time,
it was determined that the hearing would be bifurcated, with the Student’s challenge to the manifestation
determination heard and decided ﬁrst. All other issues would be heard and decided in a second phase of

the case.

The BOE ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss on October 26, 2012 challenging the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s jurisdiction
to enforce a mediation agreement between the patties. On November 2, 2012, the Hearing Ofﬁcer
issued a Decision and Order re: BOE’s Motion to Dismiss, granting that motion,

Evidentiary hearings in the ﬁrst phase of the case, relating to the manifestation determination, were
conducted on October 31, 2012 and November 1, 7 and 9, 2012. Both parties submitted witness lists
and proposed exhibits. During the hearings the Student’s Exhibits PA—l through P-22 (“P-N”) were
entered as full exhibits and the BOE’s Exhibits B-1 through B—3 1; B—33; 8-34; 8—36; 13-37, p, 1; B—38
through 13-41; and B-43 ~ B—54 were entered as full exhibits. (“B—N”) Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibits l-lO—l
through HO—3 were also admitted.

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13~0162

The Student presented testimony from Joseph Erardi, PhD; Kyle Doratz; Orv Karan, PhD; and the
Student’s Mother during the hearings. The BOE then presented testimony from Perri Murdica, PhD;
Helen Crowley; Michael Drury; Daniel Affrunti, PhD; Jennifer Wrinn and Beth Ozkan.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a Decision and Order Re: Manifestation Determination on November 16,
2012, upholding the determination that the misconduct at issue was not a manifestation of the Student’s
disability and ordering that the BOE could proceed with the expulsion process in the same manner and
process that it would with a nondisabled student, and directing that the Student’s IEP Team convene to
develop an interim alternative educational setting for the Student. On December 3, 2012, the Student
withdrew his claim that the Student’s 2012/2013 School Year IEP was not appropriate.

Additional evidentiary hearings were conducted in the second phase of the case on January 15, 24 and
31, 2013, February 5, 2013, March 13 and 27, 2013 and April 4, 2013. Exhibits and testimonial
evidence from the ﬁrst phase of the case were incorporated for use in the second phase. During these
hearings, additional Student Exhibits P—23 through P-31 and P—33 through P—35 were admitted as full
exhibits. The BOE’S additional Exhibits B-55 through B—77 were also admitted as full exhibits.

In the second phase, the BOE presented testimony from Nancy Chiero, Joseph Eddy, Beth Ozkan,
Kathryn Reinhard, Michael Dmry, Helen Crowley, and Craig Kosinski, PhD. The Student presented
testimony from OI'V Karan, PhD, Rose Givens, the Student and the Student’s mother in the second
phase.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer reviewed and considered all of the evidence presented in this matter, Speciﬁc
references to certain evidence here are not meant to exclude other evidence. All motions and objections
not previously ruled on are hereby overruled. Moreover, to the extent that the Summary, Procedural
History and Findings of F act actually represent Conclusions of Law, they should be considered as such,
and vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. v H Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F. Supp. 816, 817 (MD. Tenn.
1985).

SUMMARY

The Student is an eighteen-year-old with a disability categoty of Emotional Disturbance who is enrolled
at SHS. He was arrested on September 5, 2012 on two counts of sale of marijuana and one count of sale
of marijuana within 1500 feet of a school. The Student’s Individualized Education Program (“IEP”)
Team conducted a manifestation determination and determined that the misconduct was not a
manifestation of the Student’s disability. The Student] brought this proceeding to challenge the
manifestation determination and also the propriety of his program. Phase 1 of this case addressed the
challenge to the manifestation determination. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer upheld the IEP Team’s
manifestation determination. Phase 2 of the case addressed the Student’s Alternative Education
Program (“AEP”). This Decision and Order relates to the phase 2 issues only.

1 The term “Student” here includes not only the Student himself but also, as the context dictates, his
mother. The Student turned 18 on July 14, 2012. Soon thereafter, on August 3, 2012, he appointed his
mother to make educational decisions on his behalf. (B-28)

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 130162

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (“C.G.S.”) §10~76h
and related regulations, 20 United States Code (“U.S.C.”) §1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C .G,S. §§4—176et0 4—178,
inclusive, §§4—181a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Student is an eighteen—year-old male student with a disability in his senior year at SHS. He
has been identiﬁed as a student in need of specia1 education and related services since he was a
toddler. (B-5)

2. The Student was identified under the disability category of “Other Health Impaired-
ADD/ADHD” for most of his school career. As a youngster, he also suffered from
developmental and language disorders. (B-5)

3. In Novembe1'201 1, the Student’s disability label was changed to Emotional Disturbance in
response to a psychiatric report. (B-S; PA-Z; PA—3; Testimony of Mother and Karan “ﬁ”)

4. That repolt cited the following Axis I diagnoses for the Student:

313.81 Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder

314.9 Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder NOS

304.30 Cannabis Dependence

299.80 Pervasive Developmental Disorder NOS (Mild Residual Symptoms)

(Mother; B-5)

5. At the time of these hearings, the Student’s disability was exhibited in, among other things,
impulsivity, spontaneous or quick decision-making, failure to acknowledge the consequences of
his actions, inattention, a tendency to be easily inﬂuenced by peers, and a tendency to seek
immediate gratiﬁcation. (Karan; Mother; Crowley; Afﬁunti; thm)

6. The Student’s high school career, including his senior year, has been marked by signiﬁcant
disciplinary exclusions. All in all, he was excluded from school for disciplinary reasons for a
total of 327 school days in his four years of high school. (Mother)

7. Despite these facts, the Student has earned acceptable grades, and entered his senior year of high
school on track to earn a high school diploma at the end of the 2012/2013 School Year. (P-7)

8. During the Summer of 2012 and the 2012/2013 School Year, the Student was consistently
respectful and polite toward the adults involved with his education. He did not present a risk of
physical injury to himselfor others. (B—29; B—30; B—55)

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13—0162

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Near the end of the Student’s junior year of high school, he ﬁled a Request for Iinpmtial Due
Process Hearing. (13-14) That request gave rise to a Mediation Agreement between the BOE
and the Student dated June 22, 2012 (“Mediation Agreement”). Among other things, the
Mediation Agreement required the BOE to develop lEPs for the Summer of 2012 (“ESY 2012”)
and for the 2012/2013 School Year that included a plan to meet the Student’s transitional needs
and included completion of academic requirements for a 81-13 Diploma. (P-l)

The Mediation Agreement also required the BOE to engage Ow Karan, PhD as an “Independent
Consultant” to assist the IEP Team with these tasks. (P—l) Dr. Karan is a qualiﬁed psychologist
and academician who was already familiar with the Student and his educational program as the
result of an “ongoing close relationship with the family as an educational advocate.” (B—S)

The Mediation Agreement also provided that the B013 would engage a private agency,
Transitional Education Unlimited (“TEU”), to perform a transitional assessment during the
Summer of 2012 and report to the IEP Team with “detailed, written recommendations on an
appropriate transition program” for the Student’s 2012/2013 School Year program. (P-l)

Pursuant to the Mediation Agreement, an ESY 2012 program was developed and provided
during July and August 2012. That program was described in the 2012 ESY IEP’s Service Grid
as consisting of the following “Special Education, Related Sewices and Regular Education:”

Special Education Services:
“Language Alts instruction” for 15 hours per week by “Special Education Teacher” through one

on one instruction in a “Homebound” site to address goals 1 and 2;

"Vocational/transitional instruction” for 3 hours per week by “Vocational Coordinator” through
one on one instruction in a “Community Based” Site to address goals 5 and 6;
“Vocational/transitional instruction” for 12hou1‘s per week by “Vocational Coordinator” through
one on one instmction in a “Community Based” Site to address goals 3 through 6.

Related Services:

None

Description of Participation in General Education:
ESY; worksite experiential

(P-25)

That summer, the Student received one on one instruction from a special education teacher in
Language Arts at the Southington Public Library for approximately 15 hours each week. (B—20;
Drury) In addition, each afternoon an employee of TEU drove the Student from the library to a
restaurant for lunch, and then to another restaurant at a local amusement park, where the Student
performed unskilled restaurant work for a few hours each afternoon. TEU remained on site at 01‘
near the restaurant while the Student worked, so as to be available to him in the case ofneed.
TEU staff then drove the Student home at the end of the day. (B-29; Givens)

During the drive to and from lunch and the restaurant work site, TEU engaged the Student in
conversations about the work he was performing, how he felt about the work, his coworkers, and

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13—0162

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

any problems he was having or might expect. They also discussed personal issues not involving
the work or school. (Givens) Dr. Karan described this aspect of TEU’s service as “incidental
counseling.”2 (B-30)

The BOE’s professional staff, not TEU, arranged the restaurant work experience. (Chiero) The
Student received all training in the work tasks from the restaurant staff as palt of an orientation
provided to all summer workers. The Student did not earn an hourly wage from the restaurant,
but was instead paid a stipend by TEU.3 The BOE’s Vocational Coordinator neither
implemented nor supervised this activity. (Givens; B—29)

TEU staff also took the Student shopping on at least one occasion. During that experience, TEU
staff explained to the Student how to comparison shop. (Givens)

The TEU staff person was a professional educator, but was not certiﬁed as a special education
instructor. (Givens)

The Student and the BOB each understood that the ESY 2012 IEP’S references to
"Vocational/transitional instruction” were intended to describe the service that was provided by
TEU in ESY 2012. With the possible exception of the discussion about comparison—shopping,
however, the service that TEU provided was not “special education” because it was not specially
designed instruction to meet the Student’s unique needs. (Givens; Dmry)

Accordingly, the 2012 ESY Service Grid’s description of the program was not accurate. TEU
did not provide special education sewices for the Student, the BOE’s vocational coordinator did
not implement 01' supewise any sewice, and n0 instruction or other service was provided on a
“homebound” basis. (Givens; Chiero; Ozkan)

Moreover, although TEU provided “incidental counseling” and the TEU Staff member referred
to herself as a “job coach,” the Student’s ESY 2012 IEP did not include “incidental counseling”
or any other service, including a “job coach,” as a related sewice. (P-25; Givens)

Dr. Karan described the ESY 2012 IEP as being very successful. (Karan; B-30) Neither the
Student nor Dr. Karan objected to any aspect of the ESY 2012 program.

The Student’s IEP Team convened on three occasions in late August and early September 2012
for lengthy meetings to develop an IEP for the 2012/2013 School Year. (Ozkan; Murdica) The
IEP Team reviewed TEU’s “Individualized Cormnunity-Based Assessment Report” as part of its
deliberations. That report evaluated the Student’s performance of various vocational and
independent living skills that had been identiﬁed for assessment. With the exception ot‘money

2 Dr. Karan wrote: “[t]he rappon and trust that developed over time with [TEU Staff] contributed to [the
Student’s] willingness to be open and share personal information with her. The rides to and from work
also enabled natural opportunities for debrieﬁng and provided numerous teachable moments and
incidental counseling opportunities.” (B-30)

3 Like the BOE, TEU encountered administrative difficulties in paying the stipend, and those payments
to the Student were delayed rather than issued eveiy week. (B-29)

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13—0162

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

management, which was not assessed because TEU was unable to provide the Student with
regular paychecks, the Student showed a high skill level in all areas. (B—29)

According to TEU, the Student displayed self-control in the face of frustrating, annoying or
provoking situations, followed through on eVeryda'y‘ tasks, commitments and responsibilities,
interacted appropriately with co-workers and supervisors alike, showed resiliency when things
did not go his way, managed his time, was able to delay gratiﬁcation, and made rational
decisions. He met all of his employer’s standards for performing the tasks of his position and did
not require any accommodations, suppmts 01‘ special strategies. As the evaluator concluded, the
Student “clearly has the skills to palticipate in competitive employment and has a good
understanding of Expected Work Behaviors.” (B—29)

Among TEU’s list of recommendations for the Student’s 2012/2013 School Year IEP was the
following:

Part—time Employment.

It is recommended that consideration be given to [the Student] participating in regular, part—time
work, where he can continue to develop his work ethic, gain experience, and practice many of
the skills to be taught during his Transition program. It is recommended that [the Student]
consider working shifts that are commensurate with his peers.

It is recommended that [the Student] work with a coach initially to assist [him] in learning and
organizing tasks. Following this, the coach/school should work with [the Student] 0n mapping
out the supervisory environment, then teaching self—advocacy skills, where he can learn to shape
himself as an independent worker. Once [the Student] is ﬁrmly established in his job routine,
coaching should titrate to monitoring. Skills could be taught in a transition program, and
progress monitored at the job site via a coach, by regular check—ins with [the Student] and his
supervisors.

(1329)

Dr. Karan also made a number ofrecommendations to the IEP Team in his report. One ol‘Dr.
Karan’s recommendations was that the BOE again engage TEU to provide “vocational and
career experiences” for the Student. As Dr. Karan explained, TEU’s responsibilities should
include picking the Student up at SHS and driving him to a location such as the library for one
hour per day to receive instruction in literacy, primarily reading comprehension as it relates to
employment, careers and the rules of the road for driving. (B-30)

In addition, Dr. Karan recommended that TEU should work with BOB staff to secure a job for
the Student and also to identify employers willing to allow the Student to visit work sites that are
compatible with his career interests for short periods of time in order to provide him with real
world job exposures. (B-30) Dr. Karan also recommended that, as pan of these services, 'l‘EU
provide the Student with “incidental counseling” as it had during the 2012 ESY program.
(Karan)

The BOE agreed to provide the Student one hour of instruction each day at the library (including
for comprehension of the drivers’ manual) on a one on one basis after an short school day, as

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No 13-0162

28.

29.

30.

well as a variety ofjob exposure activities. The BOE rejected the Student’s proposal that it
engage TEU as a provider of these sewices. Instead, the BOE designated its own staff to provide
the daily one on one instruction as well as the job exposure experiences for the Student. (P—9;
Murdica; Ozkan)

The IEP Team ultimately drafted an IEP for the 2012/2013 School Year that was used at the stalt
of the school year.4 The 2012/2013 School Year IEP includes 9 goals with 39 objectives,
outlined as follows:

Goals 1 to 4 relates to “Academic/Cognitive”

Goal 5 relates to “Communication”

Goal 6 relates to “Post Secondary Education/Training
Goal 7 relates to “Employment”

Goals 8 and 9 relate to “Independent Living”

0 I O C O

The 2012/2013 School Year IEP’s Service Grid lists the following under “Special Education,
Related Sewices and Regular Education:”

Special Education Sewices:
English instmction for 3.75 hours per week (4.5 hours per 6 day cycle) by Special Education

Teacher through small group instruction in a self contained classroom site to address goals 1 and
3 through 6;

Academic support for 5 hours per week by a Paraprofessional through one on one instmction in a
“Community Based” Site to address goals 1, 2 and 5;

Vocational/transitional instruction for 10 hours per week by a Special Education Teacher in a
“Community Based” Site to address goals 5 through 9.

Related Services:

None

Description of Pa1ticipation in General Education:
CWEDO, Technology, Civics, PE

(P-9)

The IEP also stated, under the heading of “PPT Recommendations” that, among other things:
To complete credit to earn a SHS diploma, the Student will “attend classes at SHS for periods
one through 4 daily and Period 5 for PE instnlction . . . Courses will include Engineering

Graphics, CWEDO, Current Issues Semester 1, American Culture Semester 2, Senior English
(self—contained) and PE”

“Academic support was removed from the initial schedule and will be provided aﬁer school on a
daily basis . . i .”

4 The Student initially claimed that the 2012/23 IEP was not appropriate. He later withdrew that part of
his claim. (P-14)

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

31.

32‘

The “[Student] will be provided with ajob coach in the community setting for each vocational
experiential placement,” that “[a] stipend, to be determined, will be provided for [the Student’s]
participation in Vocational Job experientials.”

Under the Heading 0f PPT Meeting Summary, the IEP states, among other things, that:

The Student disagrees with the BOE’S decision to provide the “vocational program and . . .
continued vocational, independent living, and academic support programming” provided by TEU
per Dr. Karan’s recommendation; and

The Student disagrees with the BOE’s decision not to provide the Student with “driving
instruction in order to earn his license per Dr. Karan’s recommendation.”5

(P-9)

As with the ESY 2012 Service Grid, the 2012/2013 School Year Service Grid mischai‘acterized
some of the services as special education sewices when in fact they were related services. The
[BF Team, for instance, understood the Student’s transition program6 to consist of the following
three elements:

Special education instruction by a special education teacher in a self contained special education
class at SHS called “Senior English.” This special education class would also address all of the
Student’s goals and provide access to the general curriculum and credit toward a diploma.

Regular education instruction by a regular education teacher in a regular education class at SHS
called Cooperative Work Experience: Diversiﬁed Occupation (“CWEDO”) to address all of his
goals and provide access to the general curriculum and credit toward a diploma.

A series of experiences at job sites an‘anged and monitored by the BOE’s professional staff in
order to expose the Student to various career options that might match his interests.

5 The BOE did agree to provide special education literacy instruction as part of “academic suppoxt”,

which would include help with the drivers’ manual. (B-34)
6 All students over 15 years of age are to have transition services as part of their IEP. “Transition

services” are deﬁned as:

[a] coordinated set of activities . . . that . . . is designed to be within a results-oriented process,
that is focused on improving the academic and functional achievement of the child . . . to
facilitate the child’s movement from school to post—school activities; . . . based on the individual
child’s needs, taking into account the child’s strengths, preferences, and interests; . i . and
includes instruction; related services; community experiences; employment and other post—
school living objectives and, if appropriate acquisition of daily living skills. . . . Transition
services . , ‘ may be special education if provided as specially designed instruction, or a related
service, [frequirea’ to assist a child with a disability to beneﬁt from special education

34 c.1311. § 300.43 (emphasis added)

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

33. The third element of the transition plan ~ job experience activities — was incorrectly identiﬁed as
a “special education service”7 when in fact this service is more accurately described as a “related
. s
semce.”

34. The evidence established that the IEP Team did not expect or understand that the series of
experiences at job sites would include specially designed instruction at a job site as indicated on
the Service Grid. The Team did not intend to teach the Student job tasks or even basic
workplace skills as pait of this program. Notably, the TEU Assessment Report indicated that the
Student “clearly has the skills to palticipate in competitive employment and has a good
understanding of Expected Work Behaviors.” (B-29; Ozkan; Mut‘dica; Karan)

35. Instead, the IEP Team understood that it was adopting Dr. Karan’s recommendation that the
student have a variety of experiences at job sites in order to facilitate his exploration ofcai'eer
options. (B—30; Ozkan)

36. Although the IEP stated that a “job coach” would be provided for the job experiences, it did not
deﬁne the precise role of the job coach or specify the qualiﬁcations of a job coach. Indeed, there
were divergent views among 1131’ Team members as to the role of a “job coach.” Dr. Karan
described the job coach as someone to provide “incidental counseling” to the Student on an as
needed basis. On the other hand, TEU’s repott referred to a “coach” as someone who would
“assist [the Student] in learning and organizing [job] tasks . . . mapping out the supervisory
environment, . . . teaching self—advocacy skills . . . to shape himself as an independent worker” at
a part timejob. (B-29; B—30; B-36)

37. The IEP appropriately did not adopt the recommendation that the Student be provided with a part
time job. BOE staff did help the Student apply for work, but his busy schedule did not allow
time for the jobs that might have been available to him. (Chiero)

38. The BOE began to implement the 2012/2013 School Year IEP — except the job experience
activities - for the ﬁrst few days of the 2012/2013 School Year. The job experiences did not
begin immediately because, as Dr. Karan recognized, it took some time for BOE Staff to arrange
these experiences. (B—30; Crowley; Chiero).

39. On September 5, 2012, just a few days into the new school year, the Superintendent and the
administrative staff of the Southington Public Schools (“SPS”) learned that the Student had been

7 “[S]pecial education” for instance, is deﬁned as follows:
Special education means specially designed instruction . . . to meet the unique needs ofa
child with a disability. 34 C.F.R. §300.39

3 “Related service” are:
Related services means transpottation and such developmental, corrective, and other
supportive services as are required to assist a child with a disability to beneﬁt from
special education . . . .”

34 CPR. §300.34

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13—0162

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

arrested that day on two counts of sale of marijuana (C.G.S. § 21a-277b) and one count of sale of
marijuana within 1500 feet ofa school. (C.G.S. § 21a—278a(b)). (Erardi; B-37)

The Student was immediately suspended from school for ten school days. (Crowley) In the
meantime, the BOE scheduled a hearing of its governing body for October 2, 2012 to consider
the Superintendent’s recommendation that the Student be expelled. (B—43)

The Student’s IEP Team met on September 20, 2012 to conduct a manifestation determination
and to begin to plan an AEP for the Student in the event 01‘ expulsion. (B-42; Murdica; Drury;
Ozkan) The Team was not able to complete its discussion of the AEP on that day. (B-42)

The Student returned to school on September 25, 2012, and resumed the program that had been
provided before September 5, 2012. (Crowley) The Student ﬁled this Request for Impartial Due
Process Hearing hours before the time set for the October 2, 2012 expulsion hearing. (P—l4)

The Student then requested that the expulsion hearing be postponed. (Erardi) With the
assistance of their attorneys, the Student and the BOE’s Superintendent of Schools entered into
an agreement to postpone the expulsion hearing until after the challenge to the manifestation
determination could be resolved. The agreement states as follows:

The Parent and the Superintendent of Schools hereby agree to postpone the scheduled
October 2, 2012 expulsion hearing pending the outcome of the dispute resolution process
regarding the Parent’s October 2, due process complaint.

The [BOB] understands that the parent resewes the right to contest the appropriateness of the
alternative educational program provided to the student, which will commence October 3,
2012. The student’s receipt of tutoring services and participation in an internship, an
alternative education program offered by the school district pending the expulsion hearing,
shall not act as a waiver of the parent’s right to contest the issues raised in her October 2nd
due process complaint.

If the [BOB] prevails in the due process complaint, the students’ expulsion hearing will be
convened in an expeditious manner.

(13—45)

On and aﬁer October 3, 2012, the Student did not attend 81—18, and the BOE provided the AEP
that was initially discussed at the IEP Team meeting of September 20, 2012 and that was
described in the October 2, 2013 Agreement between the BOB and the Student. (Crowley;

Drury)
The AEP included the following:

The same 9 goals with 39 objectives were continued from the 2012/2013 School Year IEP (B-
58)

10

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

45.

Special Education, Related Sewices and Regular Education

Special Education Services

Special education instruction for 11 hours per week by a special education teacher through one to
one instruction at the public library to address the general curriculum for English and Current
Issues9 as well as the Studentls goals.

Related Services Job experience activities for 6 hours per week with a member of the
community (not a professional educator), monitored by a professional educator, in the
community.

Participation in General Education
General education instinction for 4 hours per week by general education teachers, through one to

one instruction at the public library to address the general curriculum for CAD10 and CWEDOll
as well as the Student’s goals.

(B-58; Murdica; Ozkan; Chiero; Reinhard; Kosinski)

The AEP was later discussed in more detail and adopted by the IEP Team on November 14,
2012. (IA) The record of the November 14, 2012 meeting reflects the basic elements of the AEP
under the heading “List of PPT Recommendations” as follows:

(2) Alternative Program if the hearing ofﬁcer upholds the 9/20/12 Manifestation Determination
PPT and if student is expelled from Southjngton High School:

— Goals/objectives that were shared previously and reviewed at the 1 1/ 14/12 PP'l‘

- 1:1 support for completion of academic work in regular education and special
education subject areas

— Job Coach support for career exploration activities, which will be individualized
for [the Student]

— Academic support to include review of DMV Driver’s Manual (license/training
materials)

- Varied career exploration activities

— Southington staff to supervise and implement all aspects of the alternative
program

- 15 hours per week for academic instruction and homework completion suppott

- Continued provision of lunch money

- Transportation provided by Southington Public Schools

- The district clariﬁed its ﬁnancial support of student during career exploration at
1 1-14 PPT. Stipend of $50/week will be provided so that student can meet his
goals in the area ofindependent living as it peitains to money management and
in skills taught through CWEDO.

- The district clariﬁed that the student will receive a minimum of 6 hours/week 01‘
career exploration activities in an alternative program . . . The district will
continue to suppOIt [the Student] in his efforts to ﬁnd a paying position in the
Southington Community.

9 “Current Issues” is a Civics class.
[0 “CAD” is “Computer Assisted Drawing” also known as “Engineering Graphics.”
H “CWEDO” is “Cooperative Work Experiences: Diversiﬁed Occupations.”

11

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

(B-58)

The IEP Team did not prepare or issue a stand-alone document exclusively reflecting the
Student’s AEP, as distinct from the IEP that was issued for the 2012/2013 School Year. Nor did
the IEP Team prepare or issue a Service Grid to reﬂect the AEP’s elements, services or delivery
sites. (B68)

Although it was not referenced in the IEP documents as a related service or othelwise, several of
the adults who worked with the Student on his AEP engaged him in discussions of his problems
and issues both related and unrelated to the AEP on an “as needed” basis. (Reinhard; Dmry;
Eddy)

The most signiﬁcant difference between the 2012/2013 School Year IEP and the AEP was that
under the AEP, regular education and special education instruction was to be delivered on a one
to one basis in the public library rather than in mainstream and sell’contained classes at SHS, and
for slightly fewer hours each week. (B—58; B‘32; B—47; Murdica)

The BOE’s professional educators believed, based on both general experience and speciﬁc
experience with the Student, that one on one instruction is a more efﬁcient form of instmction
than the group instruction otherwise deployed in the high school They also felt that the Student
would beneﬁt from the one on one delivery method because he tends to be more attentive and
less impulsive in a one on one setting than in the classroom. Accordingly, they were conﬁdent
that the regular education courses of Current Events, CAD, CWEDO and PE as well as the
special education Senior English class and academic suppon could be taught to the Student one
on one. They believed that the Student could also earn the credit needed to graduate with 15
hours of one on one instruction per week. (Ozkan; Drury; Kosinski)

The library was an appropriate choice as a site for the one to one instnlction because it has a
relatively quiet room on the second ﬂoor with tables and chairs. It is open to the public and lies
in the center of town where there are restaurants and retail businesses. (Kosinski; Reinhard)

The library is also an appropriate location because other non—disabled students receive one on
one instmction in the library. Although the Student received instruction one on one, he was in
the vicinity of other non-disabled students with whom he occasionally had brief encounters.
(Murdica; Reinhard; Kosinski)

With a few minor exceptions”, the AEP provided to the Student remained fundamentally
unchanged after October 3, 2012 through the relevant time.

12 At one point, the BOE directed the Student’s special education instructor to also accompany the
Student to his job experience site as well as lunch and then the library for his afternoon instmction.
During this service, the instmetor was to engage the Student in discussion about his activities, any
problems he was having, and anything else he wanted to discuss, much as TEU had done in the Summer.
The Student objected to this new activity. He did not want an adult to attend at his job experience or be

12

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

The IEP Team, including the Student’s mother, conducted an extensive discussion on November
14, 201213 about the special and regular education instmction being provided to the Student at
the library, including a review of written and oral reports of the topics covered and the Student’s
progress in the both the curriculum and his goals and objectives. At the meeting, BOB staff
reported that the Student made at least satisfactory progress in most of the objectives for his nine
goals and was doing well in his academics. (B-56; B-57; Drury; Ozkan; Murdica; Kosinski;
Reinhard).

As was discussed, some objectives had not yet been introduced at the time of the meeting. This
was not unusual, as much of the school year remained ahead. Team members also explained that
some objectives would be introduced later in the school year as aligned topics were covered in
the general education CWEDO curriculum and in the special education “Senior English” course
as appropriate. (ﬂ)

As was also discussed, some objectives had been or were planned to be addressed at sites other
than those suggested on the 2012/2013 School Year Service Grid. The Service Grid was not
designed or intended as a comprehensive 0r exclusive road map designating when, where or by
whom paiticular goals or objectives would be addressed. (Ozkan; Dmry; Kosinskj; Murdica)

The Student’s IEP goals and objectives are all capable of being addressed in a one on one setting
as well as in groups or in the community. (P 9) The IEP Team intended for the Student’s goals
and objections to be addressed in all settings, as appropriate. (Ozkan; Murdica; Dmry).

The IEP Team also reviewed information froln'an employer who was then providing the Student
with a job exposure. The employer reported that the Student was courteous, respectful and “very
resourceful” among other positive attributes. (B—SS)

On November 16, 2012 this Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a decision upholding the IEP Team’s l
manifestation determination. Soon thereaﬁer, on December 14, 2012, the BOE convened an ‘
evidentiary hearing and expelled the Student until October 13, 2013. (13—64) |

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION :

1.

A student who believes that his IEP does not comply with the Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (“IDEA”), may ﬁle a due process complaint with the Connecticut Department _
ofEducation to challenge the IEP. 20 U.S.C. §§ 1415(b)(6); 34 C.F.R. § 300.507; R.C.S.A. §
10-76h-2.

 

with him for lunch or travel with him between activities. He called Dr. Karan and voiced these
objections. Dr. Karan agreed with the Student and as a result, the activity was discontinued. (Reinhard)
13 The IEP T eam also discussed the elements of the Student’s IEP should he not be expelled and
returned to SHS at the November 14, 2012 Meeting

13

 

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

2. The IDEA requires that IEPS must provide students with disabilities a “free appropriate public
education” (“FAPE”) that emphasizes special education and related services designed to meet
their unique needs and prepare them for fuither education, employment, and independent living.
20 U.S.C. § 1400(d)(1)(A).

3. IDEA does not amiculate a speciﬁc level of educational beneﬁt that must be provided or mandate
that an educational program maximize the student’s potential. Instead, IDEA mandates only that
the program must be “individually designed to provide educational beneﬁt” to the student.

Board ofEducation 0f Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176, 201
(1982). Thus, in order to satisfy IDEA’S substantive demands, an IEP must be “likely to produce
progress, not regression” and provide an opportunity for more than “trivial advancement.”
Walczak v. Florida Union Free School District, 142 F.3d 119, 130 (2d Cir. 1998).

4. An IEP is not required to “furnish . . . every specialservice necessary to maximize each
handicapped child’s potential.” Grim v. Rhinebeck Central School District 346 F.3d 377, 379
(2d Cir. 2003).

5. The burden to prove that an IEP complies with the IDEA’s requirements rests on the BOE.
Schaffer v. Weast, 546 U.S. 49, 62 (2005); R.C.S.A. § 10-76h-14.

6. The test of a board of education’s compliance with IDEA’s procedural demands looks not only
to the procedural failure itself, but also to whether the failure signiﬁcantly impeded the parent’s
“opportunity to participate in the decision making process” or whether the failure “caused a
deprivation of educational beneﬁts” to the student. RE v. New York City Department of
Education, 694 F.3d 167, 189-90 (2d Cir. 2012).

7. In addition, IDEA’S Least Restrictive Environment (“LRE”) provisions require that students
“with disabilities . . . [must be] educated with children who are nondisabled” and “[s]pecial
classes, separate school, or other removal of children with disabilities from the regular
educational environment occurs only if the nature or severity of the [student’s] disability is such
that education in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be
achieved satisfactorily.” 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(5); 34 C.F.R. § 300.114.

8. A board of education may discipline at student with a disability under the same conditions that it
would discipline a student without a disability if the school, the student’s parents and relevant
members of the student’s IEP team determine that: (l) the student’s misconduct was not caused
by, and did not have a direct and substantial relationship to, the student’s disability, and (2) the
misconduct was not the direct result of the school’s failure to implement the student’s IEP. 20
U.S.C. § 1415(k)(1)(E).

9. IDEA requires that a BOE must provide an expelled student with an AP)? that: 1) enables the
student to continue to palticipate in the general education curriculum in another setting; and 2) 9
enables the student to progress toward meeting his goals and objectives. 34 CPR, §
300.530(d)(1)(i).

14

 

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13-0162

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

The AEP need not replicate the student’s IEP. A board of education “is not required to provide
children suspended for more than 10 school days in a school year for disciplina1y reasons,
exactly the same services in exactly the same settings as they were receiving prior to the
imposition ofdiseipline.” 71 Fed. Reg. 46,716 (2006).

The student’s IEP Team is charged with the responsibility to determine the “special education
and related services” necessary to “enable the child to continue to paltieipate in his general
curriculum and to progress toward meeting the goals set out in the Child’s IEP.” (E)

The BOE met its burden to show that the changes made to the Student’s program on October 3,
2012 complied with the law. There was no dispute, for instance, that the Student was removed
from SHS and an AEP was substituted for his previous program by stipulation between the
Student and the BOE’s Superintendent on October 2, 2012 with the assistance of counsel. While
that agreement may not be a model of clarity, it leaves no doubt that the Student agreed that the
AEP first proposed for discussion at the September 20, 2012 IEP Team meeting would be
implemented instead of his regular program.

Such agreements are acceptable under IDEA. 34 C.F.R.§ 300.531; 71 Fed. Reg. 46,726 (2006),
Signiﬁcantly, the BOE would have been within its rights to conduct the expulsion hearing on
October 2, 2012 and expel the Student if it had not agreed to the delay. As it happened, the AEP
was put into effect by agreement of the Student and the Superintendent before it was fully
reviewed and adopted by the IEP Team only because the Student requested that the expulsion
hearing be postponed

When the IEP Team subsequently adopted the AEP on November 14, 2012, it had already been
in effect for nearly six weeks. The Team had an opportunity to fully discuss the AEP as it had
been working and as it would go felwat'd, as well as to review the Student’s progress in the plan.
The same AEP remained in effect through December 14, 2012, when the BOE expelled the
Student, and thereaﬁer.

The ﬁrst issue, therefore, is resolved in the afﬁrmative: The AEP was adopted and substituted
for the Student’s then current program by agreement in accordance with IDEA.

The second issue, whether the AEP meets IDEA’S substantive standard for alternative
educational programs, is also resolved in the afﬁrmative The evidence was overwhelming that
the AEP was designed to enable the Student to continue to participate in his general curriculum
in another setting and to progress toward meeting his goals. 34 C.F.R. § 300.530(d)(1)(i). ln
palticular, the AEP allows the Student to receive one on one instruction from either the same
instructor who teaches the subject at SHS or from an instructor who is very familiar with the
palticular course. The one on one instruction is designed to follow the same sequence as the
instruction at SHS. I l V

The professional educator members of the IEP Team determined that the one on one instruction

offered as pan of the AEP allowed a more efﬁcient and speedier delivery of the material than
possible in the regular education classroom or even the self contained classroom at 81-18 As a

15

 

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13—0162

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

result, they reasoned that fewer hours of instruction were needed in a one on one setting to
deliver the same content

The IEP Team also believed, from general experience as well as speciﬁc work with the Student
that he would beneﬁt from the one on one delivery method. The Student tends to be more
attentive and less impulsive in a one on one setting than in the classroom. In addition, the AEP
allowed the Student to make progress on his goals and objectives, since they would be addressed
through the CWEDO and Senior English curriculum as well as individualized instmction and job
exposure activities in the community.

The Student argues for an IDEA violation because, he claims, the instruction to be provided as
pan of his transition program was to be conducted at the library rather than at a “community
based” site. The Student’s premise that the library is not a “community based” site is debatable.
The library is a public resource, frequented by disabled and nondisabled members of the
community.

Yet, even if the library is not a “community based” site, the decision to educate the student there
did not violate IDEA. The authority cited by the Student for the proposition that all transition
services must be provided in the community (absent safety concerns not present here) does not
support his claim. In Letter to Spitzer—Resnick. Swedeen and Pugh, 59 lDELR 230 (2012) the
Ofﬁce of Special Education Programs (“OSEP”) instructed that work placements implemented
as part of a transition plan should enable disabled students to work alongside nondisabled
individuals. OSEP did not generalize this guidance, however, to all transition services including
those that are not “work placements.” In this case, the Student’s transition services include
special and mainstream instruction provided in the library as well as job experiences in the
community, where he works alongside nondisabled individuals.

Indeed, the only elements of the Student’s transition services under the AEP designated to be
implemented at the library are parts of his regular education instruction in CWEDO and special
education including Senior English. The IEP Team never designated these services for delivery
in the community: they would have been delivered at SHS in the mainstream and in a self
contained class if not for the expulsion.

As OSEP has recognized, IDEA does not require that expelled students with disabilities be
educated in the public school setting “alongside nondisabled peers:”

The Act does not require that children with disabilities suspended or expelled for
disciplinary reasons continue to be educated with children who are not disabled during the
period of their removal. We believe it is important to ensure that children with disabilities
who are suspended or expelled from school receive appropriate services, while preserving
the ﬂexibility of school personnel to remove a child from school, when necessary, and to
determine how best to address the child’s needs during periods of removal and where
services are to be provided to the child during periods of removal.

71 Fed. Reg. 46,586 (2006)

16

May 23, 2013 Final Decision and Order Case No. 13—0162

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

If IDEA were interpreted to require all transitional services for disabled students to be provided
in the community, then all disabled high school students would be paltially educated in the
community. Such an interpretation would actually further segregate disabled students from their
peers by mandating programming outside of the high school for disabled students, while most
normal peers are educated inside of the high school.

IDEA’s critical concern that disabled students be educated in the least restrictive environment
seeks to avoid discrimination and segregation. This does not mean that services must be
provided in the community as opposed to schools or public libraries, but only that services may
not be provided differently for disabled and nondisabled students under the same circumstances.

IDEA’s demand for education in the least restrictive environment was met by the BOE here,
because the Student was educated in a public place occupied by nondisabled people and in the
same manner as are nondisabled students who receive one on one instruction.

The Student also argues that an IDEA Violation occurred because, he says, the AEP was
developed outside of the IEP process. This alleged procedural deﬁcit was not identiﬁed in the
Student’s Request for Special Education Hearing, and therefore is beyond the scope of this
hearing. The claim also misses the mark, as it is based largely on the circumstance that the
Student’s AEP does not precisely match the Service Grid for the 2012/2013 School Year IEP.

While there are disparities between the Service Grid and the AEP, this is not evidence that
decisions were made outside of the IEP process. First, the Service Grid was not written to reﬂect
the AEP. Instead, the “PPT Recommendations” section of the November 14, 2012 document
describes the AEP. Second, the IEP Team discussed the Student’s AEP, including how and
where goals and objectives were being addressed and the sequence of instruction at the
November 14, 2012 meeting. Thus, even if the documentation did not fully describe the
program, any resulting procedural deﬁcit did not deprive the Student of an opportunity to
participate in the decision making process or deprive the Student of educational beneﬁt.

Finally, the evidence established that the IEP Team did not intend to provide special education
instruction in the community, even in the 20l2/2013 IEP. Instead, the Team intended to provide
a related service in the community, consisting of a variety ofjob experience activities designed
to expose the Student to careers matching his interests. The plan was based on Dr. Karan’s
recommendation, which likewise did not contemplate instruction with a special education
instructor in a community setting.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

1.

2.

The changes to the Student’s program on October 3, 2012 were in compliance with the law.

The program provided from October 3, 2012 was in compliance with the law.

17

