March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Region 9 Board of Education

Appearing 011 behalf of the Parents: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces of J ennifer Laviano
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michael McKeon
Pullman & Comley LLC
90 State House Square
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board’s program for the 201 1-2012 school year provide Student with a Free
Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”) in the Least Restrictive Environment (“LRE”)?
2. Did the Board’s program for the 2012—2013 school year provide Student with a FAPE in the
LRE?
3. Did the Board Violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by:
a. failing to conduct a Functional Behavioral Assessment;
b. failing to complete an evaluation in a timely manner;
0. failing to have appropriate Individualized Education Programs in place by the ﬁrst day
of the 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 school years;
d. not considering the use of Assistive Technology in Student’s program; and/or
6. failing to maintain a continuum of appropriate placements?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

On June 4, 2013, the Region 9 Board of Education received a Request for a Special Education Due
Process Heating and the undersigned hearing ofﬁcer was appointed. A preheating telephone conference
was held on July 10, 2013 and the original deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was
established as August 16, 2013. During the preheating conference, Attorney for Parent requested an
extension of the deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order and Attorney for the Board
consented to this request. A new deadline for the mailing of the F inal Decision and Order was set for
September 15, 2013. Hearing dates in this case were scheduled for September 13, 2013, September 20,
2013 and September 24, 2013. In an email dated September 5, 2013, Attorney for the Student requested
that the hearing dates of September 13, 2013 and September 20, 2013 be postponed in order to permit
the parties to instead hold a PPT meeting on that date to review the results of Student’s Triennial
evaluation. Attorney for the Board also requested an extension of the deadline for the mailing of the

1

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

Final Decision and Order, so that the ﬁrst date of hearing did not fall beyond the existing deadline.
These requests were granted and the new deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was
set for October 15, 2013. At the ﬁrst date of hearing an extension of the deadline to mail the Final
Decision and Order was requested and granted on the record. A new deadline for the mailing of the
Final Decision and Order was set for November 15, 2013. On October 23, 2013, Attorney for the
Student requested an extension of the deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order. This
request was granted and a new deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order and deadline
was set for December 15, 2013. Another request for extension of the deadline for the mailing of the
Final Decision and Order was requested and granted to allow for additional hearing dates. The revised
deadline was set for January 15, 2013. On J anualy 14, 2014, the ﬁnal date of hearing in this case, a
brieﬁng schedule was set. The deadline for the submission of briefs t0 the Hearing Ofﬁcer was set at
February 24, 2014. An extension of the deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was
requested in order to accommodate the brieﬁng schedule. The extension request was granted and the
deadline for the mailing of Final Decision and Order was extended to Friday March 14, 2014. On
February 17, 2014, Attorney for the Board requested that the brieﬁng deadline be extended to February
27, 2014. On February 25, 2014, Attorney for Student requested that the brieﬁng deadline be extended
to March 3, 2014 and that the deadline for mailing the Final Decision and Order be moved to March 20,
2014. Both requests of Attorney for the Board were granted on F ebruary 25, 2014.

This hearing was held on the following dates: September 24, 2013, October 9, 2013, December 3, 2013,
December 4, 2013, December 12, 2013, December 13, 2013, and January 14, 2014. The Parent’s
witnesses were the Father; Dr. Melissa Olive (Dr. Olive), Susan DeVol (Teacher), and Dr. Elizabeth
Sellinger (Dr. Sellinger). The Board’s witnesses were Maggie Egan (Case Manager), Maryanne Pieratti
(School Social Worker), Rebecca Hoyt(Sch001 Psychologist), and Patricia Roszko, Director of Pupil
Services (Director). The Request for the Due Process Hearing was entered as Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibit 1.
The Parents submitted exhibits numbered P—1 to P—17 and the Board submitted exhibits numbered B-1 to
B-36, which were entered as full exhibits.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10-76h
and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(t) and related regulations, and in accordance with
the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-1766 t0 4-178, inclusive, §§4-181a
and 4-186.

RULING ON OUTSTANDING MOTIONS AND OBJECTIONS:
A11 motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.
FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

To the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of
law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. For reference, see SAS Institute Inc. V. H. Computer
Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F. v. Calallen Independent School
District, 835 F.Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993).

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

SUMMARY:

The Student is a 17 year old boy, who is currently enrolled in the in the Joel Barlow High School in the
Region 9 School District. He is eligible for Special Education under the disability category of Other
Health Impairment (“0H1”) - Attention Deﬁcit Disorder (“ADD”)/Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity
Disorder (“ADHD”). The Student claims he was denied FAPE in the LRE for the 2011-2012 and 2012-
2013 school years and that the Board committed several other procedural violations of the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”). Student claims that an Applied Behavioral Analysis program
overseen by a BCBA is a necessary component to his Individualized Education Program. Board
disagrees.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. Student was born on 12/27/1996, and is now 17 years of age. (Testimony of Father; HO-I, B-1)

2. Student’s eligibility category for Special Education under the IDEA is OI-II - ADD/ADHD Disorder
(Testimony of Father; B-1)

3. Student came to live with his adoptive parents at the age of 9. (Testimony of Father, 9/24/13, P-l3).
Prior to enrollment in the Region 9 School District, Student was enrolled in the Redding School District.

(Testimony of Father, 9/24/13, P-13)

4. Student suffered signiﬁcant abuse and neglect at the hands of his biological family until he was
removed from the home when he a small child. (P-13) Student’s childhood trauma was exacerbated by
the disruption of subsequent foster home placements, two psychiatric hospitalizations and placement in a
residential facility. (Id.)

5. In addition to a diagnosis of ADHD, Student has a diagnosis of Reactive Attachment Disorder
(“RAD”) and experiences sensmy issues. (P-13, Pg. 10)

6. There is documentation of Student’s struggle completing homework as far back as 2007. (P-13 Pg. 2~
3).

7. The Student’s Goals and Objectives in his 9th Grade IEP (2011—2012) were the result of
collaboration between the staff from the Redding School District and the staff of Joel Barlow High
School in 2013. (Testimony of Director; B-1)

8. Signiﬁcant communication and planning took place in preparation for Student’s transition from the
8th grade in the Redding School District to Joel Barlow High School in Region 9 District. This included
arrangements for Student to have multiple visits to the high school in advance of enrollment and a PPT
meeting with staff from Redding and Region 9 to address planning for the transition to high school.
(Testimony of Father, Testimony of Director, B-l) In addition, prior to attending the joint PPT meeting,
the Director attended other PPT meetings for the Student. (Testimony of Director)

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

9. The PPT meeting held on 5/13/2011 to address Student’s transition to high school included a list of
PPT recommendations. (B-I) Among these recommendations were putting an accountability system in
place to start the school year and a Behavior lntewention Plan (“BIP”). (B-l) The Special Factors
section of the 5/13/2011 IEP indicates that a B1? was developed and that IEP Goals and Objectives have
been developed to address the behaviors (Id.)

10. The list of accommodations for Behavioral Intervention in the 5/13/2011 IEP included: behavior
plans, break between tasks, de-escalation strategies, modeling expected behavior by adults,
proximity/touch control. (B-l) The accommodations to address Student’s organizational issues included
an assignment pad, daily plamier check, extra space for work, folders to hold work, and post
assignments. (Id.)

11. The 5/ 13/201 1 PPT Meeting Summary includes a report from a School Based Team Member from
the Redding School District that Student had weaknesses remembering to hand in work, organization,
following time-lines, and remembering to bring home all homework materials. Redding School District
PPT Members also reported that Student had a Behavior Plan and that many adjustments were made to
the Behavior Plan throughout the year. (Id.) It was also stated that Executive Functioning piece will be
the greatest challenge. (1d,)

12. Appended to the ofﬁcial 5/13/201 1 IEP was a document with the title Behavior Plan Modiﬁcations.
This document indicates that the existing Middle School behavior plan would remain in effect with one
modification: the addition of a “reﬂection” component to be instituted when the Student was referred to
the ofﬁce. (B~1) The Middle School Behavior Plan targeted the behavior of compliance and had 5
components including: a break pass, identifying positives, a social script, praise and weekly locker
checks. (B-l)

13. Concerns were noted at the 5/13/2011 PPT that consequences for Student behavior that are not
immediate are not effective (B-l)

14. On the Transition Planning page of the 5/13/2011 IEP, the Post—School Outcome Goal Statement -
Post—Secondary Education or Training was identiﬁed as “Upon graduation, [Student] will attend the
post-secondary program of his choice (ie two yr, four yr, technical)”. (B-l) The Transition Planning
Goal for Employment was noted as “Upon graduation, [Student] will have part—time employment in his
local community or school environment, (Id.)

15. The PPT determined that the course Ofstudy needed to assist the Student in reaching the 5/13/201 1
IEP Transition Planning Goals and Related objectives would “... include (including general education
activities: general college preparatory with support for developing executive functioning skills, and
quarterly meeting with Transition Coordinator”. (B-l)

16. The Academic Goals listed on the 5/ 13/2011 IEP were “[Student] will complete assignments.” and
Student will “[d]emonstrate an improvement in organization, study skills.” (B-l)

17. The Social/Behavioral Goals in the 5/ 13/201 1 IEP were “[Student] will demonstrate an
improvement in social skills” and [Student] will demonstrate an improvement in decision—making skills.

18. A Progress Report on IEP Goals and Objectives was issued on 2/20/2012. (B-6) Progress on both

4

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13~0524

Academic Goals were listed as SatisfactOIy, with Mastery noted in three Objectives: turning in
assignments, utilizing checklists for entering/transition into classroom and beginning task, and checking
assigmnent pad and reviewing with content lab teacher during class on what materials need to be
brought home to complete academic tasks. (Id.) Progress on the Social/Behavioral Goal of social skills
improvement was indicated as Satisfactory and the progress on the Goal of demonstrating an
improvement in decision-making skills was noted as Limited Progress. (Id.) Limited progress on the
Objective of with adult facilitation, demonstrating the ability to accept responsibility for the
consequences of his actions without trying to shift the blame to others 01' create excuses, was also noted.

Id.

19. A PPT meeting was requested by the family and held on 2/28/2012. (B-7) Parent concerns at that
time were listed as concerned about executive function, organization and follow through. (Id.)

20. On 2/28/2012, the PPT recommended consultant sewices to look at approaches for executive
functioning skills and home/school communication models. (B-7) The parties agreed to hire a mutually
agreed upon consultant. The consultant chosen was Dr. Laura Seese, who is not an employee of the
District. (Testimony of Director) The Parents’ request for aﬁer—school tutoring was refused. (B-7) The
justiﬁcation for this refusal was that the study skill areas of concern were being addressed in the
resource room. (Id.)

21. At the beginning of the 9th grade year, Student received 4.8 hours of academic support a week in
the resource room and .8 hours a week of counseling. (B-7)

22. Student’s progress on the Academic Goals and Objectives of his IEP, as noted on the 2/20/2012
Progress report, remained unchanged when the next Progress Report for IEP Goals and Objectives was
issued on 6/20/2012. (8-12)

23. Student’s progress on the Social/Behavioral Goals indicated regression on the goal of demonstrating
an improvement in social skills. (B-12) Regression was also noted in the Objectives of responding in a
socially acceptable manner when approached by peers and/or adults in a variety of structured and
unstructured settings, communicating and interacting in a socially acceptable manner with peers and
adults, with fading adult prompting. (Id.)

24. Student had two signiﬁcant behavioral incidents at school in May, 2012. (Testimony of Father; B-
10). The first incident involved the theft of a cell phone on or around May 3, 2012. The second incident
involved Student defacing another student’s planner with slurs and obscene pictures. (B-10) Student
was moved to a Level 3 Accountability for the remainder of the school year which meant he had an
escort for transitions between classrooms, to and from lunch and to the bus at the end of the day.
(Testimony of Director; 8-10)

25. A PPT meeting was held on 9/25/2012 during which Dr. Seese provided an oral report of her
ﬁndings. (B-lS) Despite the PPT agreeing to Dr. Seese serving as a consultant in February of 2012, this
is the ﬁrst time any information from Dr. Seese is obtained. (Testimony of Director)

26. The reason for the delay in receiving Dr. Seese’s written report is unclear. The District stated it had

hoped to review the report in April, but Dr. Seese had indicated that she needed more time to complete
the work. (Testimony of Director) Dr. Seese may have been ill for an undetermined length of time.

5

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

(Testimony of Director) Despite attempts by the District to obtain the report over the summer, it was
not produced until some time after the 9/25/2012 PPT meeting. (Testimony of Director) Dr. Seese failed
to note the date on which she generated the written report on the report itself. (B-16)

27. At the 9/25/2012 PPT meeting, the Parents requested four hours of aﬁer-school tutoring a week to
address difﬁculties with homework completion at home. (B-15) Dr. Seese expressed her opinion that in-
school program options better than aﬁer school tutoring for addressing Student needs. (B-15) The PPT
summary states that “[Student] needs to take ownership of his work and follow through” and then states
immediately thereaﬁer, that “[s]ome reinforcement at home tied into [homework] will be important as
getting a poor grade does not seem to be of concern to him.” (Id.) Student’s inconsistent grades were
noted in French and English. (1d.)

28. At the 9/25/2012 PPT meeting, the PPT predicted Student will attend a 4 year college as he is
interested in engineering. (B-15)

29. The Board refused to have an independent evaluation conducted, but agreed to have a Functional
Behavioral Analysis done by District staff at the 9/25/2012 PPT meeting. (B—15) The issues of
afterschool tutoring and behavior support were tabled pending further discussion between the Attorney
for the Board and Attorney for the Parent. (1d,)

30. One way in which Student’s disability was manifesting itself in the Behavioral/Social/Emotional
sphere in 10th grade was in an inability to see connection between his behavior and immediate and long
range consequences ﬂowing from his inability to inhibit some behaviors and poor self—monitoring skills.
(B-lS)

31. Student’s 9/25/2012 IEP increased resource room supp01t to 9.6 hours per week and included
modiﬁed Goals and Objectives for Student’s Sophomore year. (B-15). Student’s Academic Goals were
changed to [Student] will demonstrate the ability to self-monitor his performance against the expected
standard and [Student] will demonstrate the ability to inhibit impulsive behaviors at appropriate times.
(B-15)

32. Student’s Social/Behavioral Goals for his Sophomore year were changed to: [Student] will
demonstrate the ability to apply strategies learned in counseling sessions to his daily academic and
social routines, [Student] will develop the study skills and academic habits needed for success at the
post-secondary level and [Student] will continue to develop and reﬁne his transition plan in the area of
employment and career goals and awareness. (B-15)

33. Student’s ﬁrst semester grades as of April 23, 2013 were B in Theater, D+ in American
Government, C in Geometry, C+ in Biology, B— in French and C in English. There were a noticeable
number of absences from Study Hall, 21 in total, the reason for which was not made clear in the record.
(B-20)

34. Student’s Progress on IEP Goals and Objectives was reported on April 23, 2013, (B-21)
Satisfactory progress was reported on all IEP Goals and Objectives, with the exception of the masteiy of
one objective addressing handwriting and objectives relating to the Transition Goals that had not been
introduced. (Id.)

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

35. On April 23, 2013, the PPT met to plan the Student’s Triennial Evaluation and conduct an Annual
Review. (B—22) The PPT Recommendations were to conduct an FBA with BIP to follow, set up iPads in
classrooms, conduct an Assistive Technology evaluation, meet as PPT in one month, liaison with
outside therapist, contact district network head, fade Teaching Assistant from classroom, excused
absences for April 15 and April 16, liaison with Dr. Olive around the FBA, continue with current goals
through 10 PPT meeting in June, 2013 and conduct a re-evaluation during the summer. (Id.)

36. Attorney for the Student requested an FBA leading to a BIP and requested that Integrated Suppont
be moved to a one to one time to provide more tutorial suppont. (B-22) This was agreed to by the PPT.
Consents for FBA and AT Evaluation were signed by Parent. Consultation between Dr. Olive and
School Psychologist was requested and agreed to by District. (Id.)

37. There were no disciplinary referrals of Student to the Dean of Students at Joel Barlow from
September 20, 2012 through April 23, 2013. (B-22)

38. Student receives tutoring in Algebra as a result of his score on a readiness test for this year.
(Testimony of Case Manager)

39. The transition from the use ofteaching assistants or paraprofessionals to 1 t0 1 coaching model was
carried forward from end of Sophomore year. (Testimony of Case Manager)

40. As of J anuary 14, 2014, Student’s grade in Chemistry had moved from a D+ in the ﬁrst quarter to a
C+ in the second quarter. Student’s grade in Algebra 2A had moved from a C+ in the ﬁrst quarter to a
B+ in the second qualter. In A11, the Student went from a B+ to an F from the ﬁrst quaﬁer to the next.
In US Hist01y, the Student earned a O in both quanters. In AP English, the Student earned a D in both
quarters and in French, Student earned a C in both qualters. (P-17)

41. The J anuary 14, 2014 Powerschool repmt shows that the grades for individual homework
assignments, tests and quizzes that make up the composite quarter grade varied dramatically. (P—17, Pg.
2). A review of Chemistry grades for the period from 11/4/2013 through 1/ 13/2014 shows the following
spread of grades: A+ (11), B-(I), C (2), C-(2), D (3) and F (7). (Id.)

42. Student’s Grade Point Average (“GPA”) in Freshman year was 2.0 and 2.3 in Sophomore years.
(Testimony of Director)

43. In 2007, Dr. Loomis completed a psychological evaluation of Student. (P-13) He recommended a
contingency plan with careful tracking of behavior difﬁcuIties and to identify events triggering negative
reactions. (P-13)

44. Student came to Parents with an IEP (Testimony of Father). When Student had behavioral issues in
6th grade in the Redding School district, the PPT utilized the sewices of a behaviorist through the
Institute for Professional Practice (“IPP”) to great success. (Testimony of Father) Components of
Student’s program in this year included weekly team meetings. (Testimony of Dr. Sellinger) The IPP
behaviorist was replaced with in house staff in subsequent years and Student’s behavior declined in 7th
and 8th grades. (Id.)

45. Student was assigned a case manager for the 201 1-2012 school year and 2012—2013 school years.

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13—0524

(Testimony of Director). Student’s case manager was responsible for communicating with the general
education teachers and with home. (Id. at 15) The case manager was also responsible for making sure
the IEP was being implemented and working towards the goals and objectives in Student’s IEP. (Id. )

46. District has provided Student with services of School Social Worker since 8th grade transition
(Testimony, Director 1/14/2014 Pg. 25). The School Social Worker’s charge was working on social
emotional goals including improving decision making, accepting responsibility, strategies to manage
anger. (Testimony of Director)

47. Behavioral issues continued to occur in 9th grade. (Testimony, Father) Student’s difﬁculties in 9th
grade eventually resulted in teaching assistants being assigned to Student in all of his academic classes
in the 201 1-2012 school year. (Testimony of Director) This expansion of in-class support was needed
because student was not always representing the homework that needed to be done, nor was he
presenting homework that should have been completed accurately which made the case-manager’s
monitoring very difﬁcult. (Id.) Teaching Assistants were tasked with the job of recording Student’s
assignments and recording and tracking completion of assignments (Testimony of Director)

48. Student was resistant and disrespectful in interactions with paraprofessionals in his 9th grade year.
Student had a history of this behavior. (Testimony ofDirector, B-7)

49. Student and family have had the involvement of outside agencies including Intensive ln—l—lome
Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Services on two occasions (IICAPS). (Testimony of Father, Director)

50. The Region 9 School Psychologist conducted a Functional Behavioral Assessment (“FBA”) which
was completed on J une 7, 2013. (8-6) This F BA identified behaviors of concern as “Incidents of
escalated behavior in the classroom and missed homework assignments.” (Id.) The Operational
Deﬁnition of Targeted Interfering Behavior was noted as: “[Student] occasionally engages in behavior
that is inappropriate for the classroom environment. Examples of these behaviors include verbal
argument and refusing to work on missed homework assignments.” (B—26)

51. Student does not have a learning disability. (Testimony of Dr. Olive, P-13)

52. District Staff conducted an Assistive Technology (“AT”) Assessment and generated a report on
May 21, 2013. (B24) The assessment indicated that Student would beneﬁt from the use oftechnology
with writing tasks. (Id.)

53. Parents have concerns about Student using the internet unsupewised. (Testimony of Father) This
stems from misconduct on the palt of Student and more signiﬁcantly, from Studentls biological family
utilizing the internet to ﬁnd Student through information Student had posted online and come to
Student’s summer job. (Id.) This contact had a deleterious effect on Student’s behavior. (Id.)

54. There was an incident at Joel Barlow High School where Student was missing from his classes for a
signiﬁcant portion of the school day and when ﬁnally found, was discovered working on a computer
unsupervised. (Testimony of Father)

55. The Progress Repelt for IEP Goals and Objectives dated 6/ 13/2013 indicated Satisfactory progress
on Student’s Academic Goals and Social Behavioral Goals. (B-27) Limited progress was noted on the

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

objective of training Student in a self-regulatory strategy. . . .[Student] will keep a daily journal in which
he predicts how effectively he will accomplish a task.., his predicted level of success, and his actual
level of performance in relation to his predictions. (Id.)

56. A PPT was held on June 13, 2013. (B-28) Parents believed Dr. Olive would be in attendance to
review School Psychologist’s F BA. (Id.) Board indicated there was a consultation with Dr. Olive prior
to conducting the FBA, and that Dr. Olive’s forms were used. (Id.) Teacher reports Student in not being
invested in his own grade. (Id.) Family through counsel requested an independent FBA and this action
was refused. (Id.)

57. A Transition Report dated June 12, 2013 has been completed by the District Transition Coordinator.
(B-28) Transition concerns noted in the repott included college and career readiness skills and making
connections between choices at the high school level and the impact on successful college and
workplace experiences. (Id.) Transition goals to address concerns included acquiring skills to
successﬁllly transition student to college and increase his understanding of the value of work, and
working on appropriate behavior expectations in the workplace. (Id.)

58. Dr. Olive was retained by the District, in her capacity as a Board Certiﬁed Behavioral Analyst
(BCBA) and conducted an “Observation, Program Review and Recommendations” for Student.
(Testimony of Director, P~2) A written report was generated on April 18, 2013. Dr. Olive noted a
discrepancy between Student’s academic performance and his tested ability and identiﬁed three possible
explanations for that discrepancy. (Testimony of Dr. Olive, P—2) Dr. Olive identiﬁed deﬁcits in the
written goals including an unclear relationship between the goals and the objectives, and lack of clarity
in deﬁnitions utilized in goals. (Id.) Dr. Olive also indicated that goals and objectives that rely on adult
actions as triggers for behavior, do not foster independence. (Id.)

59. Dr. Olive’s recommendations include explicit skill instruction in the areas where skills are lacking,
Assistive Technology, revision of IEP Goals and Objectives to be more measurable, a thorough FBA to
determine if school failure is motivated by external reinforcers 01' if it is due to executive functioning
and/or disability related conditions and collaboration between home school and the community. (P—Z)
Dr. Olive also included a list of identiﬁed skills that Student appeared to be lacking. (Id.) This extensive
list included Student’s ability to submit all work on time. (Id.) Student’s inappropriate behaviors, as
identiﬁed by Dr. Olive in her report, were lying, bringing inappropriate items to school, and opening up
social media accounts without permission. (Id.)

60. Dr. Olive indicated that Student should be college bound but expressed concerns about college
readiness if Student’s behaviors were not addressed. (Testimony of Dr. Olive)

61. Student’s general cognitive ability is within the average range, with a Full Scale Intelligence
Quotient of 109. (P4) Student’s verbal reasoning abilities are in the superior range as evidenced by
Verbal Comprehension Index of 120. (Id.) Student’s perceptual reasoning on the Perceptual Reasoning
index is in the average range. (Id.) Working memory for Student is a weakness in comparison to his
verbal reasoning abilities. In working memory, he is in the average range scoring a 97 on the Working
Memory index which means he did better than 42% of his peers. (Id.) Student’s performance on the
Processing Speed Index was 97, or average speed. Inconsistencies were seen in Student’s visual and
auditory memory skills during testing. (Id.)

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

62. Father repoﬂs that struggles with Student surrounding completion of homework continued
throughout Student’s ﬁrst two years of high school. (Testimony of Father)

63. Student seeks independence through his behaviors, but does not know how to do it independently.
(Testimony of Dr. Sellinger)

64. Although a document was appended to the IEP dated 5/ 1 3/201 1, a BIP, there was no BIP noted in
the IEP dated 9/15/2012. (B-1,B-15)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

The Student is eligible under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”) to receive
a Free Appropriate Public Education in the Least Restrictive Environment. 34 CFR 300.17. The parties
do not dispute that the Student is eligible for Special Education under the OHI-ADHD classiﬁcation
found in 34 CFR 300.8(9).

Parents asseit that the Individualized Education Programs (“IEP”) designed and implemented for
the Student in the 201 1-2012 and 2012-2013 school years were inappropriate. Board disagrees. The
determination of what is an appropriate education for a student with a disability requires an analysis of
each student’s unique needs and must be determined on a case-by-case basis. Board ofEduc. of the
Hendrick Hudson Cent. Sch. Dist. v. Rowley, 553 IDELR 656 (U.S. 1982).

Board has the burden of showing its program for this Student is appropriate. Conn. Agencies
Regs. § 10-7611-14. In order to meet this burden, the Board must demonstrate compliance with the
procedures set forth in the IDEA and show that the IEP is reasonably calculated to enable the child to
receive educational beneﬁts Board of Educ. of the Hendrick Hudson Cent. Sch. Dist. v. R0wley,ﬂ
IDELR 656 (U.S. 1982). If the Board can successfully demonstrate that it has met the two~part Rowley
test, it has met its burden and nothing fuﬂher is required. (Id.)

The palties are limited to discussing the placement and sewices speciﬁed in the written plan and
therefore reasonably known to the patties at the time of the placement decision when determining the
adequacy of an IEP. See F uhrmarm ex rel. Fuhrmann v. E. Hanover Bd. of Educ, 993 F.2d 1031, 1039
40 (3d Cir. 1993) (”Rowley requires, at the time the initial evaluation is undeltaken, an IEP need only be
’1'easonab1y calculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁts.’ [T]he measure and
adequacy of the IEP can only be determined as of the time it is offered to the student, not at some later
date." (quoting Rowley, 458 U.S. at 206—07)). A signiﬁcant amount of evidence produced at the hearing
addressed Student’s 2013-2014 IEP and functioning within the current school year. While the
appropriateness of the 2013—2014 program is not at issue in this hearing, this Hearing Ofﬁcer declines to
ﬁnd that a reasonable inference should be drawn that the Parents consider Student’s 2013~2014 program
to be appropriate, solely on the basis that Parent did not request to amend the Hearing Request to include
the current year. No information beyond the fact that an amended complaint was not ﬁled was noted in
suppoﬁ of Board’s argument that the inference be drawn. Many reasonable inferences could be drawn
from that one fact, including an inference that the Parents, by ﬁling in June, might have reasonably
expected the alleged problems to have been addressed before April 2014. Thus, this Hearing Ofﬁcer
ﬁnds that there is an insufﬁcient basis for that inference.

The question before this hearing ofﬁcer is whether the Board’s program adequately addresses
Student’s needs under the Rowley standard: was Student’s IEP for the 2011-2012 and 2012—2013 school
years reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive an educational beneﬁt? Student’s program,
while it had helpful components, failed to provide a program that addressed the ongoing issue of
Student’s inability to generalize critical skills to home, namely completing assignments outside of

10

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

school and turning them in. Despite reports of the success of earlier programs that involved a
behaviorist, the Board declined to utilize one for the 2011-2012 and 2012—2013 school years. As this
Student is of average intelligence and academic ability, the educational beneﬁt analysis turns on whether
the Student is able to successfully access the curriculum and complete work consistent with the
expectations set foxth by school staff. Student clearly does not complete work or hand it in consistently,
nor does he complete it with consistent quality commensurate with his abilities, despite a signiﬁcant
level of support.

The Board has suggested that the Parents’ true concern is raising Student’s grades and there
exists a dispute as to whether Parents were told that they could reasonably expect B grades from
Student. Regardless of whether this dispute stems from a miscommunication or misunderstanding, it
does not bear on the issues at hand. The Parents are not requesting that Student gets all 83. Parents are
trying, in the waning moments of their son’s high school career, to determine the source of the behaviors
which interfere with his educational progress and address them, before the oppommity to obtain that
information and act on it is lost.

The Board’s representation that the increase in Student’s GPA ﬁ'om 9th grade to 10th grade is
evidence of progress is compromised by the inconsistency of Student’s work as a whole within each
class. The Director testiﬁed that Student’s GPA of 2.0 in his Freshman year “would be a straight C
average” and that the 2.3 Student earned at the end of his Sophomore year is” C-pluses and some B-s.”
An analysis of how Student’s daily work in each class results in a quanerly grade of a C or B- is critical
to understanding why a slight rise in GPA may not be an accurate assessment of progress for this
Student.

In the current year, Student is achieving a C 01‘ D qualterly grade by producing a signiﬁcant
amount of A and B level work riddled by Ds and Fs. In other words, his grade is dragged down to a C
or D, frequently by the lack of work completion or complete failure on assignments 01' tests. Thus,
while the Student may have received an overall C in a class, that grade may not accurately reﬂect the
rollercoaster that is this Student’s academic achievement.

In the context of this hearing, Student has been described as “inconsistently consistent”, in a
manner that suggests that is just the way he is, and that is the end of the inquiiy. Although the District in
questioning its witnesses attempted to characterize Student’s interfering behaviors (lying and failing to
turn in homework assignments) as typical of high school students, Student, by virtue of his disability and
history of trauma is atypical and his needs are complex.

The Board’s Progress Reports on IEP Goals and Objectives for Student’s ﬁrst two years of high
school consistently indicated satisfactory progress on many of Student’s IEP Goals and Objectives.
However the evidence indicates periods of signiﬁcant regression within the ﬁrst two years of high
school requiring signiﬁcant changes to the program midstream.

Student’s IQ and Achievement testing indicate that Student is of average intelligence and has
average, and in some case superior, academic abilities. Student does not have a learning disability.
Unfortunately, Student has still not internalized the skills necessary to succeed in a post-secondary
educational or work setting. Throughout his ﬁrst two years of high-school he continued to stmggle to
complete work outside of classes and prepare for tests within it. In order to avoid Student starting
college with skill deﬁcits that cast serious doubt on his ability to independently and successfully
navigate a higher education environment, a multi-pi‘ong approach must be instituted.

Student’s intelligence and academic achievement testing indicate that college should be an
option for Student. The District changed the Student’s post—secondary transition goal from a 2 year, 4
year, or vocational school to a four year college, based on his interest in engineering. Board and Parent
witnesses testified that Student’s innate abilities should make college an option for him. Witnesses also

11

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

testiﬁed that Student is not ready for college. While organizational weaknesses exist and contribute to
Student’s difﬁculties, the evidence shows that what impedes the student most is his behavior. Student
has been struggling with homework completion and test preparation for years.

The marked disparity between ability and achievement and the obsewations made by District
Staff that the Student is not making the connection between his choices and the impact of those choices
on his future indicate that this Student is not being giving the tools he needs to successfully transition to
the post—secondary educational setting set forth in the District’s IEP. Student is not college ready and
without intewention is not on a trajectory to obtain the skills he lacks and are necessary to succeed in a
four—year college.

The Transition Coordinator made a recommendation that Student be allowed to experience the
natural consequences of his actions. While Student’s chronological age and grade level might appear to
warrant this recommendation, even the most cursory review of Student’s childhood reveals that his
childhood was marred by horriﬁc instances of unnatural consequences. These childhood experiences
and their impact are being addressed in school by the School Social Worker and outside of school by
Student’s therapist. The work being done by the School Social Worker has its own pace and focus and
is clearly a very impoﬁant component of Student’s IEP.

The task of getting Student to an understanding of the relationship between his actions and his
future at a fundamental level may well be addressed in the therapeutic setting. It may also be addressed
through an FBA and BIP by creating opportunities for success on a smaller, more concrete scale. While
there may be some overlap in terms of goals, that therapeutic work is not mutually exclusive with the
work in an ABA program. These are complementaiy processes and should be coordinated to the best
effect for the Student.

Despite reports of the success of earlier programs that involved a behaviorist, the Board declined
to utilize one for the 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 school years. As this Student is of average intelligence
and academic ability, the educational beneﬁt analysis turns on whether the Student is able to
successfully access the curriculum and complete work consistent with the expectations set forth by
school staff. Student clearly does not complete work or hand it in consistently, nor does he complete it
with consistent quality commensurate with his abilities, despite a signiﬁcant level of support.

The Functional Behavioral Assessment conducted by the district did not assess the issue of
Student’s continued failure to complete assignments and turn them in nor did it address Student’s
ongoing struggle to generalize skills to the home environment and the maladaptive behavior oflying
within the school environment. The singular focus of the Board’s FBA limited the ability to fully
evaluate the Student’s interfering behaviors, and thereby allow those behaviors to be addressed.

Demonstration that a procedural Violation has occurred does not in and of itself entitle parents to
prevail. It must be shown that the procedural Violations "impeded the child's right to a [FAPE],"
"signiﬁcantly impeded the parents' opportunity to paiticipate in the decision~making process," 01'
"caused a deprivation of educational beneﬁts." 20 U.S.C. § 1415(f)(3)(E)(ii); AC, 553 F.3d at 172.
Multiple procedural violations may cumulatively result in the denial of a F APE even if the violations
considered individually do not. See Werner v. Clarkstowrl Cent. Sch. Dist, 363 F. Supp. 2d 656, 659
(S.D.N.Y. 2005).

In the present case, the issues of the continuum ot‘appi'opi‘iate placement and appropriateness of
the USPS in place at the stalt of each school year are, in essence, elements of the substantive denial of
FAPE claims and as such are addressed in the substantive analysis. The remaining procedural violations
raised by the Parents did not occur. Thus it is not necessary to evaluate whether there was a denial of
FAPE as a result. The Board did not Violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to conduct a
Functional Behavioral Assessment. While the parties disagreed about who should conduct the FBA, one

12

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

was conducted by the School Psychologist and the Board retained an outside consultant to review the
Student’s ﬁle, conduct observations and generate a report.

The Board did not violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to complete an evaluation
in a timely manner. The record reﬂects that the failure to provide a timely report was the fault of the
independent professional contracted to make the report, not the Board. The Board made good faith
efforts to obtain the report earlier than the time it was produced, but those efforts were unsuccessful.

The Board did not violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to consider the use of
Assistive Technology in Student’s program. Technology was offered to and utilized by the Student in
his educational program, within the conﬁnes imposed by Parents out of fear for Student’s safety.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The Board failed to provide Student with a Free Appropriate Public Education in the Least
Restrictive Environment for the 201 1-2012 and 2012-2013 school years. The issues of a failure to
maintain a continuum of appropriate placements and failure to have appropriate lEPs in place by the ﬁrst
day of the 201 1-2012 and 2012—2013 school years are subsumed under the ﬁnding of a denial of FAPE,
The Board did not violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to conduct a Functional Behavioral
Assessment. The Board did not Violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to complete an
evaluation in a timely manner. The Board did not Violate Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to
consider the use of Assistive Technology in Student’s program.

The Board shall immediately engage the services of the Institute for Professional Practice
(“IPP”) In the event that IPP cannot or will not accept the referral, the Board shall immediately engage
the services of another outside organization that employs staff with education and training comparable to
IPP staff. Any alternative outside organization retained shall have at least one BCBA in its employ, who
will serve as consultant to Region 9. IPP, or its equivalent, shall be retained for the purposes of having
a BCBA consult with the Region 9 Planning and Placement Team and Staff responsible for creating and
implementing Student’s IEP. In the event that IPP is not available, the alternative outside organization
shall be determined by the PPT. The BCBA will review the FBA conducted by the Region 9 School
Psychologist and any data that was collected in preparation for the FBA. The BCBA shall make
recommendations regarding whether the FBA can and should be modiﬁed or an additional FBA is
necessary to address the speciﬁc issues of Student failing to complete homework, failure to turn in
homework, and failing tests and exams. The BCBA shall also make recommendations regarding the
design and implementation of a BLP for Student. The BCBA shall take no more than 10 hours to review
the District’s FBA (including the documentation and data relied upon for the District’s FBA) and
develop recommendations for the design and implementation of a BIPT 1n the event the BCBA
recommends another FBA be conducted after his or her review, the second F BA may be conducted by
District Staff (determined by the PPT) under the supervision of the BCBA. The BCBA shall also
monitor the implementation of the BIP. If the BCBA feels that team meetings with family and school
staff are necessary, the Board shall facilitate those meetings by making space and staff available upon
reasonable request. The BCBA shall train District staff, as needed, to assist in the implementation of
Student’s BIP. The Board shall contract with IPP, or its equivalent, to have the BCBA conduct the
initial 10 hour review and provide two hours a week of consultative services during the academic year.
The BCBA shall use these two hours to consult with staff, train staff, meet with family, supervise an
additional FBA, if another is deemed necessary by the BCBA, and monitor development and
implementation of the BIP. The BCBA shall have discretion to determine how much time she shall
apply to each of the tasks above during her two hours per week. The BCBA shall also have the
discretion to change the two hour schedule as needed, and may provide more hours in one week and less

13

March 20, 2014 Final Decision and Order 13-0524

than two hours in another week, although the total number of hours of sewices for the remainder of the
2013-2014 school year and the 2014-2015 school year shall not be increased as a result. For example if
the BCBA wishes to schedule a 3 hour training he or she may provide 3 hours of training in one week
and then only provide one hour of consultation the following week.

The Board shall contract with IPP, 01' its equivalent, to have the BCBA participate at the annual
review PPT meeting (currently scheduled for June 12, 2014) and the annual review PPT meeting in 2015
(whenever that is scheduled). The Board shall be ﬁnancially responsible for the costs of the BCBA
attending those meetings and attending any additional PPT meetings held during the 2014-2015 school
year. The services of the BCBA shall be in place through Student’s graduation, but shall not be required
during the Summer of 2014.

COMMENTS ON THE CONDUCT OF THE HEARING, PURSUANT TO
R.C.S.A. §10-76h-161bl:

Attorney for the Board and Attorney for the Student conducted themselves with the utmost civility and
professionalism throughout this hearing. They are both to be commended for advocating zealously on
behalf of their clients, without losing sight of the fact that regardless of the outcome of the hearing, the
family and school staff will need to work together for the remainder of Student’s time in the Region 9
School District.

14

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student‘requhing special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board ofEducation shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hean'ng ofﬁcer. »

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing officer may be made to state 01' federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code I415(1')(2)(A).

’1),- /:/ 4144/)” [Z
5mg; A/M/{N

”(Hearing Ofﬁcer Sigﬁature

IB/d'ﬁé H. FHO‘A .1

Hearing Officer Name iI‘1 Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

 

