November 5, 2012 Final Decision and Order 13—0116

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Region 12 Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Jemtifer Laviano
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC

76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Leander A. Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hattford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney Via
letter dated September 4, 2012.1 It was received by Board of Education’s (“BOB”) Attorney on September 6.
The thiI’ty-day resolution period ended October 6‘ The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was
November 20. A telephonic pre—hearing conference was held on September 17. Attorney Laviano appeared on
behalf of Student and Attorney Dolphin appeared on behalf of BOB. The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the

2010-11 school year?
2. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the

201 1 extended school year?
3. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the

2:01 1-12 school year?
4. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the

2012 extended school year?
5. Did the Board of Education fail to offer Student a free appropriate public education during the 2012-

13 school year?

Hearings were scheduled for October 30 and November 2. Via letter dated October 8, BOE’s Attorney
requested a 30-day extension of the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order to permit the parties to
schedule hearing dates far enough after mediation to allow them to prepare exhibits after mediation, which was
scheduled for October 22. Aﬁer fully considering the positions of the patties, the request was granted and the

deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended to December 20.
The parties patticipated in mediation 0n Octobe1'22. Student’s Attorney indicated that the parties

reached an agreement in principle, that they would work to reduce the agreement to writing, that they were
conﬁdent that the matter was resolved to the parties’ satisfaction, and that Student’s Parents were withdrawing

the request for due process without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed without prejudice.

' All dates are 2012 unless otherwise indicated.

 

