June 6, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0420

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Ridgeﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf ofthe Parents: Attorney Tracey Spencer Walsh
Mayerson & Associates
330 West 381h Street, Suite 600
New York, NY 10018

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, P.CV
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Brette I—I. Fitton, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the District commit substantive and/or procedural Violations ofthe Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (hereinaﬁer “IDEA”) resulting in a failure to provide the Student with
a Free Appropriate Public Education (hereinafter “FAPE”) in the Least Restrictive Environment
(hereinafter “LRE”) for the 2012-2013 school year by:
a. failing to adequately provide Student with paraprofessional suppmt as set out in Student’s
Individualized Education Program (hereinaﬁerf‘lEW);
b. failing to ensure that Student’s paraprofessional was within an adequately close physical
proximity to Student;
c1 failing to adequately train and supervise Student’s paraprofessional;
d. permitting the District’s Case Manager to contribute to Student’s increased anxiety;
e. failing to adequately communicate with Student’s parents;
f. failing to address all of Student’s areas of deﬁcit; including, but not limited to, organization
and other areas of executive functioning, social skills, pragmatic language, anxiety, and ﬁne
motor deﬁcits;
g. failing to propose a program that is “reasonably calculated” to provide Student with a
FAPE in the LRE;
h. producing an IEP that contains misinformation regarding the parents’ palticipation,
cooperation and/or agreement with the IEP;
i. failing to honor federal mandates that “provision” be expressly made in Student’s IEP for
individualized parent counseling and training as a related service for students who have been
diagnosed on the autism spectrum;
j. failing to provide any IEP goals for parent training and counseling;
k. failing to develop measurable annual goals to meet each of Student’s educational needs
related to his disability and failing to adequately address all of the Student’s unique and
individualized needs;

J une 6, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13~0420

l. failing to allow Student’s Parents meaningful input and palticipation in IEP development;
m. engaging in “predetel‘mination” in the IEP development process, precluding any
meaningful palticipation from Student’s parents and/or other team members;

n. failing to consider the full continuum ofspecial education placements and failing to inform
Student’s parents of options on the continuum;

0. failing to address Student’s self—advocacy deﬁcits;

p. failing to provide Student with sufﬁcient support from case-manager and school
psychologist;

q. proposing programs that offer no or inadequate suppoxts for school personnel on behalf of
Student;

r. failing to properly and timely fulﬁll and implement express IEP mandates;

s. failing to address, adequately or otherwise, incidents of bullying towards Student by other
students;

I. failing 01' refusing to consider modiﬁcations necessary for Student to have a FAPE;

u. seeking to unilaterally implement a “fading plan” for Student; and/or

V. focusing on Student’s good grades and not Student’s real special education needs.

2. If the District has failed to fully implement the Student’s IEPs, adequately provide Student
with Student’s statutory pendency entitlements and/or provide the Student with a FAPE, should
the remedy include compensatory education?

SUMMARY:

The due process hearing request was received by the Board of Education on April 1 1,
2013. A prehearing conference was held on April 26, 2013. Hearing dates were scheduled for
May 22, 2013, May 24, 2013 and June 6, 2013. The deadline for the mailing 0fthe ﬁnal
decision and order was conﬁrmed as J une 25, 2013. On May 9, 2013, Attorney for the Parents
ﬁled an adjournment request. On May 10, 2013, Attorney for the Parents ﬁled a revised
adjournment request. In both requests, Attorney for the Parents sought a postponement of the
May hearing dates. On May 14, 2013, the request for the adjournment of the May hearing dates
was granted. On June 3, 2013, Attorney for the Parents withdrew the pending due process
hearing request without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed without prejudice.

 

