June 26, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—03 1 9

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Fairﬁeld Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Jennifer D. Laviano, Esq.

Law Ofﬁces ofJennifer D. Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Michelle Laubin, Esq.

Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

Parent’s Issues:

1.

Was the program offered by the Board from March 13, 201 1 t0 the end of the 2010—201 1
school year appropriate and did it provide the Student with a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) in the least restrictive environment (LRE)?

Was the program offered by the Board for the 20] 1-2012 school year appropriate and did
it provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE?

ls the program offered by the Board for the 2012—2013 school year appropriate and does
it provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE? If not;

Should the Student be placed at St. Vincent’s Special Education School in Bridgeport,
Connecticut for the 2012-2013 school year?

Did the Board Violate the Student’s Procedural Safeguards by failing to convene a due
process hearing without delay after an independent educational evaluation (IEE) was
denied, requesting the Parent to sign a release assuming ﬁnancial liability for devices,
failing to accurately reﬂect the Parent’s concerns on Prior Written Notice and excluding
the Student from school without providing sewices?

Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the Board’s denial of FAPE?

Board’s Issues:

1‘
2.

Were The Board’s triennial evaluations of the Student appropriate? If not;
Is the Student entitled to independent educational evaluations in the following areas:
psychological, speech and language, occupational therapy and physical therapy?

June 26, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0319

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Multiple Disabilities and is entitled to receive FAPE as
deﬁned in IDEA 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent requested an independent
evaluation of the Student. The Board refused the Parent’s request.

On February 20, 2013 the Board received notice 01" the Parent’s request for due process. The
parties agreed to go to mediation in place ol‘a resolution meeting. The mediation session was
held on May 9, 2013.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on February 20, 2013; a pre-hearing conference was
held on March 14, 2013‘ At the pre-hearing conference the Parent’s attorney amended the due
process complaint and added the Parent’s issues. There was no objection to the amendment by
the Board. A hearing date ot‘June 6, 2013 was chosen by the parties

At the May 9, 2013 mediation, the parties were not able to come to an agreement. The hearing
ofﬁcer sent notice that the hearing schedule would then proceed with the Parent having the
Burden of Production and that the Board’s issue of the independent educational evaluation would
be dealt with in the course of the hearing.

The Parent’s attorney objected to this format stating that the Board should have the Burden of
Production because the Board has the issue of whether the Board’s evaluations where
appropriate, and requested permission to ﬁle a brief on the matter. This request was denied.
(Hearing Ofﬁcer’s Exhibit No. 4)

In an electronic transmission, the Parent’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the parties
were able to resolve the matter but needed additional time to ﬁnalize the agreement The Parent’s
attorney requested that the matter be withdrawn without prejudice. There was no objection by the
Board. The Board also requested a withdrawal without prejudice of their issue. There was no
objection by the Parent. The withdrawals were granted.

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the
parties” mediation and the hearing dates. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is
June 28, 2013.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS W'ITHDRAWN WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

