August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0454

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Shelton Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalfofthe Board: Attorney Christine L, Chinni
Chinni & Meuser, LLC

One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Ann F. Bird, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Shelton Board of Education (Board) conduct neuropsychological,
psychoeducational and/or psychosocial evaluations of the Student?

2. Il‘so, were the Board’s neuropsychological, psychoeducational and/or psychosocial
evaluations appropriate?

3. If not, is the Student entitled to an independent neuropsychological,
psychoeducational and/or psychosocial evaluation at the Board’s expense?

PROCEDU RAL HISTORY:

The Board ﬁled this case with the State of Connecticut Depaltment ot‘Education, Bureau
of Special Education on May 2, 2013. This Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on May 6,
2013. The date for mailing the decision was initially established 10 be June14, 2013‘

The hearing convened on J une 13, 2013. The parties requested that the decision date 01‘
June 14, 2013 be extended to accommodate the hearing date and brieﬁng schedule.
Consequently, the decision date was extended to August 12, 2013.

The Board’s witnesses were the School Psychologist, the School Social Worker, the High
School Head Master and the Assistant Director of Special Education (Assistant Director).
The Student’s witness was the Student’s Parent.

The Student submitted proposed Exhibits numbered S 1 through S 16. Objections to
Exhibits S 2 and S 4 through S 7 were sustained. The remaining Student Exhibits were
entered as full exhibits. The Board submitted proposed Exhibits numbered B 1 to B 9,

August 5, 20l3 Final Decision and Order 13~0454

which were all entered as full exhibits. Additionally, Exhibit HO 1 was entered as a full
exhibit.

The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions oflaw set forth herein, which reference certain
exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supporting evidence in the
record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled. To
the extent a procedural claim raised by the Board oi‘Education 01' the Student is not
speciﬁcally addressed herein, this Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked
meriL

To the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. For reference, see SAS
Institute, Inc v, S & H ComputerSyslems, Inc, 605 F,Suppi 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and
Bonnie Ann F. v. Calal/en Independent School District, 835 F .Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736
(SD, Tex. 1993).

SUMMARY:

The Student initiated a referral for evaluation ot‘eligibility for special education and
related services. Psychoeducational and Psychosocial Evaluations were obtained, and
reviewed by the Flaming and Placement Team (PPT). The Student disagreed with those
evaluations and requested independent evaluations at the Board’s expense. The Board
ﬁled this case to establish that the evaluations it obtained are appropriate. After
considering the evidence presented and the arguments ol’the parties, the hearing ofﬁcer
decided that the Board’s evaluations are appropriate and that the Student is not entitled to
independent evaluations at the Board’s expense.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
Section (C.G.St §) lO-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code Section (U.S.C.
§) 1415(1‘) and related regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative
Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.) C.G.S. §§4~I76e to 4-178, inclusive, §§4—l 8la and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary
evidence and testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1, The Student was born on August 25, 1996, and is now sixteen years 01" age. He
attends Shelton High School, and has never been identiﬁed as a student with a
disability, eligible for special education and related services. (Exh B 3; Testimony of
Assistant Director (hereaﬁer “Assistant Director”))

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0454

2. On November 6, 2012, the Board’s Superintendent ofSchools notiﬁed the Student’s
Parents of the Superintendent’s request that the Board conduct an evidentiary hearing
to consider expulsion of the Student. In addition, the Superintendent notiﬁed the
Student’s parents that the expulsion hearing was scheduled to take place on
November 19, 2012. (Exh B 1)

3. Thereafter, the Student’s Parent and Attorney requested that the Student be referred
for evaluation of possible eligibility for special education and related sewices, as a
student with a disability. (Assistant Director)

4. The Board’s Assistant Director made a referral for such an evaluation on December
10, 2012. (Exh B 2)

5. A PPT meeting was conducted on December 18, 2012 to address the referral, The
Student’s Parent and Attorney attended the meeting. (Exh B 3)

6, The PPT decided to conduct a complete psychoeducational assessment 01‘ the Student.
The PPT designed an Evaluation that included examination of cognitive functioning,
academic achievement, behavior, auditory processing and attention as well as a social
work appraisal. (Exh B 3)

7. The PPT, including the Student’s Parent and Attorney, discussed and agreed upon the
speciﬁc assessment instruments that would be used in the Evaluation, including even
discussion and agreement on several speciﬁc protocols and subtests that would be
included. (Exh; Assistant Director; School Psychologist)

8. The Student’s Parent signed a consent form for the Evaluation that identiﬁed the
lbllowing as the “Test(s)/Evaluati0n Procedure(s)” and “Area(s) ofAssessment” that
would be included in the evaluation process:

Wechsler Scales Intelligence
Woodcock Johnson Achievement

BASC — II Behavioral/Emotional
Rating Scales Behavioral/Emotional

Social/Work Assessment Behavioral/Emotional
Other subtests upon
Psychologists’ discretion Attention Deﬁcit
NEPSY—ll Auditory Processing

(Exh B 3)

9. The School Social Worker performed a social work review and issued a report
entitled “Social Work Psycho Social Assessment” on January 1 1, 2013. (Exh B 4).

10. The School Social Worker’s report included a summary of the Student’s School,
Developmental/Social History and Family History. In putting together her report, the

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0454

11.

12.

13.

14.

School Social Worker used standard professional protocols, including reading the
Student’s education ﬁle and intewiewing the Student’s Parent. (School Social
Worker; Exh B 4)

The School Social Worker is trained and experienced in the ﬁeld ot‘school social
work. She holds a masters degree in school social work and has been employed as a
school social worker for more than ten years. She is eeltiﬁed by the State of
Connecticut Department of Education to serve as a school social worker. (School
Social Worker; Exh B 4)

The School Social Worker concluded that the Student had been under various
stressors and that he may lack the ability to take responsibility for his actions.
Additionally, she repoﬁed that the Student has little motivation for academic
performance and that he may not have appropriate coping skills to deal with
disappointment. (School Social Worker; Exh B 4)

The remaining elements of the Evaluation were performed by the School
Psychologist in January 2013 and summarized in her report entitled
“Psychoeducational Evaluation” dated February 5, 2013. (Exh B 5)

The School Psychologist reviewed the Student’s education ﬁle and administered the
following assessment instmments:

A. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 7 Fouﬁh Edition (WAIS—IV) also
known as “Wechsler Scales”. This instrument measures a person’s cognitive ability,
or intellectual functioning. The School Psychologist administered speciﬁc subtests in
the areas of Verbal Comprehension (Similarities, Vocabulary and Information);
Perceptual Reasoning (Block Design, Visual Puzzles and Matrix Reasoning);
Working Memory (Digit Span and Letter Number Sequencing); and Processing Speed
(Coding and Symbol Search). Additionally, she developed composite scores in the
areas of Verbal Comprehension, Perceptual Reasoning, Working Memory and
Processing Speed;

B. Woodcoek-Johnson HI Tests of Achievement (WJ ACH 111), This
instrument measures academic achievement. It was selected to assess the Student’s
skills in the areas 01‘ reading, math and written expression. Speciﬁc subtests in Letter»
Word Identiﬁcation, Reading Fluency, Calculation, Math Fluency, Spelling, Passage
Comprehension and Writing Samples were administered;

C. Developmental Neuropsychological Assessment — Second Edition
tNliPSY-II )1 This assessment measures neuropsychological development. It is the
most widely used instrument to identify neuropsychologieal problems in students
Speciﬁc subtests were selected to measure neuropsychologieal development in the
domains ofAttention and Executive Functioning (Animal Sorting , Total Correct
Sorts, Animal Sorting Combined, Clocks, Inhibition - Naming Combined, Inhibition
7 Inhibition Combined, and Inhibition ~ Switching Combined) and Memory and

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0454

15.

16.

17.

18.

Learning (Memory for Faces Total, Memory for Faces Delayed, Memory for Names,
Memory for Names Delayed, Memory for Names + Delayed, Narrative Memory
Total, Narrative Memory Free and Cued Recall Total, Narrative Memory Recognition
total score, Memory for Designs Content, Memory for Designs Spatial and Memory
for Designs total);

D. Behavior Assessment System of Children 7 Second Edition (BASC—II).
This instrument is designed to shed light on a student’s behaviors and emotions at
school and in the home/community environments. In this case, Teacher Rating Scales
from three of the Student’s teachers, the Parent and the Student’s Self—Repoﬁ were
obtained in the five main areas of Externalizing Problems, Internalizing Problems,
Behavior Symptoms, Adaptive Skills and School Problems;

E. RCMAS-2 Scale. This rating scale was used to identify the Student’s
level of anxiety; and

F. Emotional Proﬁle Index. This rating scale was employed to obtain
information about the Student’s view 01‘ his own emotional functioning

(School Psychologist; Assistant Director; Exh B 5)

'I‘ he School Psychologist is well qualiﬁed as a school psychologist, and has
signiﬁcant training and experience in the administration and interpretation OfIhe
assessments that she used. She is certiﬁed by the State 01" Connecticut Department of
Education to work as a school psychologist in public schools in Connecticut. She has
a bachelor’s degree in Psychology and a master’s degree and sixth year certiﬁcate in
School Psychology She has been employed as a school psychologist with the Board
for thilty—four years. (School Psychologist)

The instruments and assessments that the School Psychologist used are all widely
used by school psychologists and relied on by planning and placement teams in
Connecticut public schools. Moreover, they were speciﬁcally selected with the input
of the Student’s Parent and Attorney. (School Psychologist; Assistant Director; Exh

135)

There were no assessments, assessment instalments, protocols or subtests that the
Student 01‘ his Parent or Attorney requested that were not administered. (School
Psychologist; Assistant Director)

Absent any evidence to the contrary, a presumption of regularity establishes that these
assessments were administered under standard terms and conditions, in a language
and form likely to yield accurate information and that they are not racially or
culturally biased. (See United Slates v. Chemical meda/ion. Imz, 272 US. It 14715
(1926) (presumption that public ofﬁcial complies with established standards of
performance) and Guidelinesfm' the Practice ofSchool Psychology, Connecticut

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0454

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

State Department ol‘ Education (2004))

The Student’s scores on the WAIS—IV and WJ ACH 111 tests of cognitive functioning
and academic achievement respectively were almost entirely1 in the average and
above average ranges. (Exh B 5)

The congruence ol‘ the Student’s WAIS—lV and WJ ACH III scores reveals that the
Student’s academic achievement is generally commensurate with his intellectual
functioning. This, in turn, suggests that the Student does not suffer from a learning
disability or processing disorder. (School Psychologist; Assistant Director; Exh B 5)

Likewise, the Student’s scores on the NEPSY—ll Assessment of Attention and
Executive Functioning subtests were at or above average. His scores on the NEPSY-
[1 Assessment of Memory and Learning subtests were all “At Expected Level" except
for Memory for Names Delayed, which was “Below Expected Level.” These test
results suggest that the Student does not have deﬁcits in the areas of executive
functioning, attention 01' auditory processing (School Psychologist; Assistant
Director; Exh B 5)

The BASC—ll’s assessment of Social~Emotional Functioning produced some scores in
the “At~Risk” and “Clinically Signiﬁcant” ranges on the Teacher reports as well as on
the Parent’s repott. The Student’s selfreport included no At Risk 0r Clinically
Signiﬁcant behaviors. (Exh B 5)

The RCMAS-2 and Emotional Proﬁle Index rating scale results were partially
inconsistent with information in school records, suggesting that the Student might not
have been truthful in some of his responses.

The Evaluation as a whole included a variety of tools and measures that are widely
used in the ﬁelds of school psychology and school social work, and that are
recognized as technically sound ways to gather information relevant to identiﬁcation
ofa student’s possible disabling condition. (School Psychologist; Assistant Director;
School Social Worker; Exhs B 4 and B 5).

The Evaluation also satisﬁed the PPT’s directive to evaluate the Student in speciﬁc
domains. The Student’s cognitive functioning and academic achievement were
evaluated through the WAlS—lV as well as the W] ACH HI, NEPSY—ll, and Social
Work Assessment. Behavior ratings were conducted through the BASC—Il, RCMAS<
2 and Emotional proﬁle lndex. The Student’s auditory processing and attention were
assessed through the WAIS—IV, WJ ACH lll, NEPSY-Il, Social Work Assessment
and various behavior ratings.

I Only the Student’s scores on the WAlS-IV subtesl of Working Memory and on the W]
ACH III subtests of Math Calculation and Math Fluency were in the “low average”
category (Exh B 5)

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 130454

26. The Student’s PPT convened on March 26, 2013 to review the Evaluation. The
Student’s Parent attended the meeting but his Attorney did not. (Exh B 7)

27, After reviewing the Evaluation, the PPT decided that the Student is not disabled and
is not eligible to receive special education and related services. (Exh B 7)

28‘ The Student’s Parent requested independent neuropsychological, psychoeducational
and psychosocial evaluations. 1n response, the Board denied these requests and
initiated this case. (Exh B 7)

29. The Superintendent also rescheduled the expulsion hearing, which had been delayed
by agreement of the parties until the Evaluation was completed. (Exhs B 8 and B 9)
The Board conducted an expulsion hearing on April 17, 2013 and accepted the
Superintendent’s recommendation for expulsion of the Student, (Exh B 9)

30. The Student’s PPT never addressed the question of a netu'opsychological evaluation
and consequently did not direct that one be conducted. (Exhs B 3 and B 7)

31, The Board never conducted a neuropsychological evaluation of the Student. (Exhs B
3 and B 7)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1. A board of education must provide an independent evaluation at no cost if requested
by a student who disagrees with an evaluation already obtained by the board. The
board may avoid this obligation only by proving, at a due process hearing, that its
evaluation is “appropriate.” 20 U.S.C. §1414(b); 34 C.F.R. §300.502(b)i

2. In this case, the Student requested independent evaluations in three areas —
neuropsychological, psychoeducational and psychosocial. The ﬁrst area 7
neuropsychological - was never the subject of an evaluation obtained by the Board
with which the Student could possibly disagree. Accordingly, the Board has no
obligation to pay for an independent neuropsychological evaluation of the Student.
Id.

3‘ 1f the Student believes that a neuropsychological evaluation is necessary, he may
request that his PPT direct that the Board obtain one. It’the PPT refuses such a
request, the Student may challenge the PPT’s decision through the due process
hearing procedure. 20 U.S.C. §§1415; 34 CPR. §300,507; and C.G.S §10-76h, That
is not, however, the posture ot‘this case, which was instead initiated by the Board
pursuant to its obligations under 20 U.STC. §1414(b) and 34 C.F.R. §300.502(b).

4‘ An “appropriate” evaluation is one that: (a) uses a variety oftools and strategies to
gather information relevant to identiﬁcation of a student as having a disability and/or
the content of a student’s individualized education program; (b) does not rely on any

 

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order l3~0454

10.

11.

single measure or assessment as a sole criterion; (0) uses technically sound
instruments; (d) does not discriminate on a racial or cultural basis; (6) is selected and
administered in a language and form most likely to yield accurate information; (f) is
used for purposes for which it is valid and reliable, and is administered by trained and
knowledgeable personnel in accordance with provided instructions; (g) assesses all
areas of suspected disability; and (11) uses tools and strategies that provide
information relevant to meeting the student’s needs 20 U.S.Ct §14]4(b); 34 CFR.
§300.502(b); Warren (1. v Cumberland (fmmly .S'Lrlmnl Dish, 190 F.3d 80, 87 (3rd Cir,
l990).

The Evaluation conducted by the School Psychologist and School Social Worker
relied on a variety oftools and strategies to gather information relevant to whether the
Student has a disability. It did not use any single measure or criterion.

The Evaluation also employed instruments that are widely used in public schools in
Connecticut for the same purposes, that are technically sound, that are not
discriminatory and that are likely to yield accurate information.

Additionally, the instruments and protocols used by the School Psychologist and
School Social Worker were used for the purposes for which they were designed, and
provided information needed to assess the Student’s educational needs.

The instruments and protocols selected also assessed all areas of suspected disability.
In particular, the Evaluation investigated the possibility of a learning disability as
well as deﬁcits in executive functioning, attention, auditmy processing and memory
that the Student’s Parent and Attorney suspected might exist.

Notably, the widely used NEPSY—Il instrument was administered to shed light on the
Student’s executive functioning, auditory processing, attention, learning and memory
The results demonstrated that the Student’s functioning in these areas is at least
average.

In conclusion, the Evaluation obtained by the Board and conducted by the School
Psychologist and School Social Worker was an appropriate Psychoeducational
Evaluation. 191.

T0 the extent that a “Psychosocial Evaluation” may be distinct from a
“Psychoeducational Evaluation,” the Evaluation obtained by the Board and conducted
by the School Psychologist and School Social Worker was also an appropriate
Psychosocial Evaluation. lg.

August 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0454

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1,

The Board obtained psychoeducational and psychosocial evaluations but not a
neuropsychological evaluation.

The Board’s psychoeducational and psychosocial evaluations were appropriate

The Student is not entitled to an independent neuropsychological, psychoeducational
0r psychosocial evaluation at the Board’s expense.

