March 4, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0272

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Fairﬁeld Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Father, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Board of
Education’s (“BOE’s”) Attorney via letter dated December 27, 2012.I It was received by
Student’s Parents on December 31, 2012.~The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and
order was February 14.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on January 14. Attorney Laubin appeared
on behalf of BOE and Student’s Father appeared on behalf of Student The following issues were
identiﬁed:

1. Are the Board of Education’s 201 1 evaluations of Student appropriate?

2‘ If the answer to Issue One is in the negative, should the Board of Education be
required to reimburse Student’s Parents for their privately obtained Independent
Educational Evaluation?

Via letter dated January 16, BOE’s Attorney requested a 30—day extension of the deadline
to mail the ﬁnal decision and order to accommodate the parties” anticipated settlement
negotiations. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request was granted and the
deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until March 14. A hearing was
scheduled for March 5,

The panties participated in mediation on February 26 in another matter related to
unilateral placement at which time they expected to discuss the issues raised in this hearing at the
same time. Following the mediation, BOE’s Attorney indicated that BOE agreed to reimburse
Student’s Parents for their private evaluation of Student, making the due process request
unnecessary. BOE therefore withdrew their request for due process.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case was dismissed with prejudice.

' All dates are 2013 unless otherwise indicated.

