September 21, 2012 Final Decision and Order 13—0096

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Regional School District No. 6 Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chimli & Meuser LLC
30 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent Pro Se
Appearing before: Attomey Ann F, Bird, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:
1. Is the Board of Education's 201 1-2012 functional behavioral evaluation 0fthe Student
appropriate?
2. If not, is the Student entitled to an independent functional behavioral evaluation of the Student at

the Board of Education‘s expense?

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY

The Board submitted a Request for Impanial Special Education Hearing in response to the Student’s
request for an independent functional behavioral evaluation of the Student, on August 22, 2012. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case on August 24, 2012. On August 27, 2012, the Hearing Ofﬁcer
issued Notice of a telephonic pre-hearing conference to be conducted on August 30, 2012. At the
Student‘s request, the telephonic pre-hearing conference was then postponed to September 12, 2012,

On September 11, 2012, the Board informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer and the Student that the Board
understood that the Student had withdrawn her request for an independent functional behavioral
evaluation. The Board further stated that if the Board‘s understanding was correct, the Board asked that

its Request for Impaﬂial Special Education Hearing be dismissed.

On September 12, 2012, the Hearing Ofﬁcer attempted to conduct the scheduled telephonic pre-hearing
conference. Although the conference was not conducted, the Hearing Ofﬁcer was able to secure the
Student‘s conﬁrmation] that the Student had withdrawn her request for an independent functional
behavioral evaluation, Upon further conﬁrmation that the Board of Education therefore sought
dismissal of its Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing, the Hearing Ofﬁcer did not funher
pursue a telephonic pre-hearing conference.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

It is ordered that the Board of Education's request for dismissal is granted, and this case is dismissed.

 

