November 5, 2012 Final Decision and Order 13-0048

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Fairﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Andrew Feinstein
86 Denison Avenue

Mystic, CT 06355

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem Moses & Devlin

75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney via
letter dated July 25, 2012.] It was received by Board ofEducation’s (“BOB”) Attorney on July 25. The thirty~
day resolution period ended August 24. The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was October
8.
A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on August 10. Attorney Feinstein appeared on behalf of
Student and Attorney Laubin appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education fail to offer Student an appropriate educational program for the 2012—13

school year?
2. 1f the answer to Issue One above is in the afﬁrmative, what shall be the remedy?

Via e—mail dated August 10. Student’s Attorney requested a 30-day extension of the deadline to mail the
ﬁnal decision and order in order to schedule and complete hearings after mediation which was scheduled for
September 24. After fully considering the positions of the patties, the request was granted and the deadline to
mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until November 7.

The parties participated in mediation on September 24. The parties did not resolve the matter at

mediation. Hearings were scheduled for October 2, 16, and 17.
Via e-mail dated September 25, Student’s Attorney requested that the October 2 hearing be cancelled to

permit production of extensive exhibits after mediation and ﬁve days prior to hearing. After fully considering
the positions of the parties, the request was granted. The October 2 hearing was cancelled. The hearings for
October 16 and 17 were still scheduled to proceed.

On Saturday, October 13, Student’s Attorney indicated that the parties were in the ﬁnal stages of
executing a settlement agreement which they expected to complete by the morning of Monday, October 15.
Late in the day on October 15, Student‘s Attorney indicated that a settlement agreement had been executed and
that the request for due process was withdrawn with prejudice, Due to the lateness of the notice, the hearing
proceeded on October 16. Student’s Attorney did not appear; BOE’s Attorney did appear and indicated that the
paities executed a settlement agreement and that Student’s Attorney had withdrawn with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case was dismissed with prejudice.

' All dates are 2012 unless otherwise indicated.

