October 15, 2012 Final Decision and Order 13—0063

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Meredith Braxton
280 Railroad Avenue Suite 205
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Abby Wadler
Town of Greenwich Law Depamnent
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Attorney Via letter dated August 6, 2012.1 It was faxed to Board of Education (“BOE”) on
August 61 The thirty—day resolution period ended September 5. The deadline to mail the ﬁnal
decision and order is October 20.

A te1eph0nic pre—hearing conference was held on August 21. Attorney Braxton appeared
on behalf of Student. No one appeared on behalf of BOE. The Hearing Ofﬁcer e-mailed BOE’s
representative requesting that shejoin the conference call. She did not appear. After waiting nine
minutes, the pre-hearing conference proceeded without a BOE representative.

The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Whether the Board of Education failed to offer Student an appropriate educational

program for the 2012—13 school year?

2. Whether the Board of Education failed to offer Student an appropriate educational

program for the 201 1-12 school year?

3. Whether Student is entitled for compensatory education?

4. Whether Student is eligible for special education services until age 21?

BOE was given until September 5 to request an additional pre-hearing conference to

discuss the above identiﬁed statement of issues. No such request was made.

' All dates are 2012 unless othenvise indicated.

 

The parties palticipated in a resolution session on August 20. They did not resolve the
case but agreed to palticipate in mediation.

Hearings were scheduled for September 27 and 28. Via e-mail dated September 19,
Student’s Attorney requested a continuance of the hearing dates. After fully considering the
positions of the panics, the request was granted.

Via e—mail dated October 11, Student’s Attorney indicated that the parties had reached a

ﬁnal agreement and withdrew the request for due process with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is hereby dismissed with prejudice.

