January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0199

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Middletown Board ot‘Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Ms. Laurie Slade
Supervisor of Pupil Services & Special Education

Middletown Board of Education
311 Hunting Hill Ave,
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing before: Attorney Catherine M. Spain
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

1. Should the Student be evaluated to determine if she is eligible for special education services?
2. 11‘ yes, should the evaluation occur in a diagnostic placement?

SUMMARY:

The Student, a kindergaltnel‘, began the 2012-2013 school year at Farm Hill School. Following several
instances of behavioral difﬁculties, which resulted in repeated physical restraint ofthe Student, the
Mother requested that the Student be transferred to Macdonough School. As a result, the Student began
to attend Macdonough School in November. Subsequent to continuing behavioral issues, including the
Student’s attempted elopement, the Board sought the Mother’s consent to conduct an initial evaluation
of the Student. The Mother did not respond to the Board. The Board then invoked due process
procedures in order to conduct an educational evaluation of the Student in a diagnostic setting at Farm
Hill School.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:
A special education hearing was requested by the Board on November 2, 2012. On the same date, the
undersigned hearing ofﬁcer was appointed. The Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing,
which was subsequently marked as Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibit~1, reads as follows:

Description ot‘the nature 0fthe issues in dispute included related facts:

[The Parent] has refused PPT recommendation for Initial Evaluation including an FBA as well as

a diagnostic placement at Farm Hi11‘ [The Student] has been unsafe multiple times at school,
requiring ﬁve restraints and one seclusion.

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0199

On the Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing, the Board proposed the scheduling ol‘a due
process hearing, which would allow it to demonstrate the need to conduct an initial evaluation of the
Student in a diagnostic placement at Farm Hill School. Accordingly, a pre-hearing conference was held
by telephone on November 21, 2012, and hearing dates were set for December 12 and 17, 2013. On
December 6, 2012, the Board made a motion for an extension, which was granted to accommodate the
scheduled hearing dates.

The hearing convened and concluded on December 12, 2012. In advance of the hearing, the Board
submitted exhibits numbered B—l through B-1 1, which were entered as full exhibits. The Mother, who
did not attend the hearings, submitted no exhibits. At the December 12 hearing, the Board presented its
case through the submission ol‘exhibits as well as by the testimony ost. Slade, who is the Supervisor
of Pupil Services & Special Education for the district. The deadline of the ﬁnal decision and order is
January 17, 2013.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

In accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act and Connecticut General Statutes
(“C.G,S.”) §4-1766 through §4—178, this matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to 20 United
States Code (“U.S.C.”) §1415(f) and its related regulations and pursuant to C.G.S. §10-76h and its
related regulations.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1, The Student, who has a history of elopement, is a ﬂve—year-old kindergartner whose
neighborhood school is Macdonough School. (Testimony ost. Slade)

2. The Student began the 2012—201 3 school year at Farm Hill School due to a request by the
Mother, who explained that the Student would be safer at 1“ arm Hill School because it is falther
from a road (into which the Student could run) than Macdonough School. (Testimony ost.
Slade)

3. Beginning in early September, the Student regularly experienced behavioral problems in the
classroom such that on September 4, the Student’s teacher implemented a behavior plan. (Exh.
B-3)

4. On September 1 1, the Student attempted to run away from school and was restrained by a
behavior technician. While restrained, the Student kicked, punched, bit and spit on the
technician who was holding her. (Exh. B—1)

5. Within twenty—lbur hours, Farm Hill School personnel notiﬁed the Mother ol‘this incident in
person and by telephone and mailed her Connecticut’s “Parental Notiﬁcation ol‘the Laws
Relating to Seclusion and Restraint in the Public School.” (Exh. B—l; Exh. B—3)

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0199

10.

11

12,

14.

15.

16.

On September 12, the Board initiated a referral to determine the Student’s eligibility for special
education and related services and invited the Mother to attend a Planning and Placement Team
(“PPT”) meeting scheduled for September 20, 2012, (Exh. B—3)

The September 12 referral to determine the Student’s eligibility for special education and related
sewices states that the Student’s teacher, who had contacted the Mother with concerns as early as
August 31, 2012, was concerned about the Student’s behavior, speciﬁcally her kicking a fellow
student and her attempted elopementt (Exh. B-3)

At the September 20, 2012 PPT meeting, which the Mother did not attend, the PPT
recommended that the Student be monitored though general education. The PPT also determined
that the Student’s classroom teacher would seek the Mother’s consent for a functional behavior
assessment (“FBA”) in order to allow for the development of a behavior intervention plan
(“BIP”). (Exh, B—3)

On September 24, 2012, the Student was again restrained by a behavior technician, whom she
kicked and struck, after throwing objects at other students. (Exh. B-4)

Within twenty—four hours, school personnel notiﬁed the Mother of this incident, (Exh, B-4)

. On September 25, 2012, the Student was restrained by a behavior technician in order to prevent

elopement. (Exh. B-4)

School personnel attempted within twenty-four hours to notify the Mother ot‘this additional
incident. A September 25, 2012 letter sent to the Mother by Farm Hill School Principal Richard
Henderson states that school personnel’s attempts to reach the Mother by telephone were
unsuccessful. (Exh, B-4)

, On October 2, 2012, the Student was restrained by a behavior technician after she attempted to

throw a chair, Her classmates were removed from the class for their safety. (Exh. B-4)

Within twenty—l‘our hours, school personnel attempted to notify the Mother of this incident. An
October 2, 2012 letter sent to the Mother by Principal Henderson states that the school staff’s
attempts to reach the Mother were unsuccessful. (Exh. B4)

011 October 9, 2012, due to the Student’s continuing behavioral problems, the Board initiated a
second referral to determine the Student’s eligibility for special education, and invited the
Mother to attend a PPT meeting scheduled for October 19, 2012. (Exh. B—S)

The October 12 referral to determine the Student’s eligibility for special education and related
services states that the Student’s teacher, who had contacted the Mother on September 14, 20, 27
and 28, was concerned about the Student’s attempts to kick, punch and bite a behavior
technician, as well as her attempts at elopement and at eating non—edibles. (Exh. 13-5)

 

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13-0199

17.

18.

19,

20.

21.

22.

23.

At the October 19 PPT meeting, which the Mother did not attend, the PPT concluded that the
Student was not making satisfactory progress in her current placement. The PPT recommended
that the Student be evaluated in a diagnostic placement in a self-contained classroom at Farm
Hill Schoolt (Exh. 8-5)

The Board mailed a packet including the PPT report and recommendations and a consent form to
conduct an initial evaluation to the Mother. (Testimony ot‘Ms. Slade)

The packet, addressed to the Mother with return receipt requested, was refused and mailed back
to the Board. (Exh. 13-7; Testimony ost. Slade)

The Student has not undergone an educational evaluation, and is not currently eligible for special
education and related services. (Exh. B—S)

The Mother has been notiﬁed of a1] PPT meetings and 0f the due process hearings, but has
chosen not to attend any meetings or hearings. (Exh. B—l through B-1 1)

Whereas Farm Hi1] SchooI contains a seltlcontained classroom, Macdonough School does not.
(Testimony ost. Slade)

Whereas Farm Hill School has behavioral technicians on staff, Macdonough School does not.
(Testimony ost. Slade)

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.

The Board is seeking a diagnostic placement, the putpose of which is to assess the needs of a
child for whom an individualized education program may be needed, but for whom the
evaluation study is either inconclusive 01‘ the data insufﬁcient to determine the child’s
individualized education program. RCSA §10-76d—14(b).

The diagnostic placement is a method of evaluation, not an educational placement. See, e.g,
West Hartford Board ofEduca/z'on, OCR 0] —86—1016, 352 IDELR 300 (1986).

A hearing ofﬁcer may order special education evaluations without the consent 01‘ the parent.
C.G.S. §10-76h(d)(1). Federal regulations speciﬁcally provide that when the parents of a child
with a disability refuse consent for the initial evaluation or a reevaluation, the Board may
continue to pursue the evaluations through the due process procedures. 34 C.F.R. §
300.300(a)(3).

It is the obligation ofa PPT to ensure that such an evaluation includes reports concerning the
Child’s educational progress, structured observation and such psychological, medical,
developmental and social evaluations as may be appropriate in determining the nature and scope
ofthe child’s exceptionality, for purposes of determining whether the child qualities for special
education and related services. Regulations 01‘ Connecticut State Agencies (“RCSA”) §10—76d—

9(a).

January 3, 2013

5.

Final Decision and Order 13-0199

It is likewise the obligation of the PPT, in overseeing such an evaluation, to evaluate the Student
in accordance with the provisions of 34 C.F.R‘ § 300.304, which include:

Notice. The public agency must provide notice to the parents of a child with a disability, in
accordance with See. 300,503, that describes any evaluation procedures the agency proposes to
conduct.

6.

10.

11.

@Conduct of evaluation In conducting the evaluation, the public agency must——

QlUse a variety ot‘assessment tools and Strategies to gather relevant functional,
developmental, and academic information about the child, including information
provided by the parent, that may assist in determining--

QLWhether the child is a Child with a disability under Sec, 300.8; and

mThe content of the child’s IEP, including infonnation related to enabling the
child to be involved in and progress in the general education curriculum (01‘ for a
preschool child, to patticipate in appropriate activities);

QLNot use any single measure or assessment as the sole criterion for determining
whether a child is a child with a disability and for determining an appropriate educational
program for the child; and

QLUse technically sound instruments that may assess the relative contribution of
cognitive and behavioral factors, in addition to physical or developmental factors.

In this case, the strong evidence presented proves that there are genuine concerns regarding the
emotional and cognitive status of the Student, as well as her safety. Ms. Slade, the district’s
Supervisor ot‘Pupil Services & Special Education, testiﬁed credibly and persuasively that the
Student needs to be assessed so that the Board may determine an appropriate program for her
needs.

The Board has demonstrated that additional assessment information is needed to determine
whether the Student may be eligible for special education and related services.

The PPT can more safely and fully evaluate the Student in a diagnostic placement.

The Student requires removal from her current educational placement for her safety.

The Student would beneﬁt from a self-contained classroom, which would provide behavioral
support for the evaluation process and assist the PPT in developing an appropriate educational
program for her.

In sum, the Board has proven the need for a diagnostic placement of the Student.

5

 

January 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 13—0199

12. Accordingly, the Board is entitled to the requested diagnostic placement, even without parental
consent, in order to ascertain the Student’s disability, if any, and her level of functioning

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board shall conduct an evaluation of the Student, in accordance with 34 C.F.Rt
§300.304 and RCSA §10—76d—14(b) and §10—76d—9(a), within the diagnostic placement it has
proposed at Farm Hill Elementary School.

2. The Board shall convene a PPT weekly to review the Student’s diagnostic placement.

3, The diagnostic placement shall be terminated as soon as the Student’s needs have been
determined, but, in any event, within eight weeks.

4‘ Five days before the end ot‘the diagnostic placement, the PPT shall reconvene to write the
Student’s IEP, it‘it is determined that an IEP is needed, based on ﬁndings made during the
diagnostic placement and other evaluative information regarding the Student.

 

