July 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0557

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. East Windsor Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attorney Elizabeth Moyse
The Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

This matter settled prior to the convening 0f the preheating conference thus no issues
were identiﬁed for due process hearing by the Parties.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parents ﬁled this complaint for due process on May 29, 2014. A request to set a
prehearing conference date was sent to the Parties on May 30, 2014 with suggested dates
for the prehearing conference. There was no response from either Party, thus, following
the passing of the last suggested date the Hearing Ofﬁcer inquired of the Parties if
alternative dates could be suggested. On June 20, 2014 counsel for the Board indicated
via email that the matter had settled. The Hearing Ofﬁcer then inquired from counsel for
the Parents if the matter had indeed settled as there had been no communication to the
Hearing Ofﬁcer in that regard. On June 25, 2014, counsel for the Parents indicated that
the matter had settled and the Parents requested that the matter be dismissed.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The Parents have requested that this matter be dismissed. With no further issues to be
decided, this matter is DISMISSED.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
' providing Special education for the student requiring special education does not' take

action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the: hearing ofﬁce: within ﬁfteen days after

receipt" thereof; the State Board ofEducaﬁon shall take appropriate action to enforce tho

fmditggs or pzbscriptx'od of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decisioa of the hcan'ng ofﬁcer may be made tqstazc or fcdéral
provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut

com by cithcrparty in accordance with the
Gcncral Statutes, and Title 20, United States Coda 1415(i)(2)(A)4 .

  

Hcaring Oﬂicer Signahuc

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

Hearing Officer Name in Print‘

 

