April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0262

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Naugatuck Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Parent pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Michelle Laubin, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC
75 Broad Street

Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Officer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board provide appropriate programs for the 201 1—2012, 2012—2013, 2013-

2014 school years?

2. Did the Student derive educational beneﬁt from the Board’s program and make
meaningful progress?

3. Did the Board follow the recommendations of Dr. David Suscovich’s independent

psycho-educational evaluation?
4. Was the Board required to follow the recommendations of Dr. David Suscovich’s

evaluation?
5. Is Student’s placement in a specialized program such as Ben Bronz Academy or Eagle

Hill School appropriate?
6. Should the Board be required to ﬁnancially support private out of district placement

for Student?

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Hearing Request on November 5, 2013
and the Board received the Complaint on November 8, 2013. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was
appointed on November 8, 2013 and conducted a Prehearing Conference on November 27,
2013 wherein the hearing issues above were identiﬁed and an initial hearing date was
scheduled for January 9, 2014. The Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a Memorandum to Parties
outlining the conduct of the hearing. This included a requirement that witness lists and
exhibits should be sent to the opposing patty and Hearing Ofﬁcer within ﬁve (5) business
days of the Hearing and the manner in which exhibits should be numbered and labeled.
(See R.C.S.A. Section 10-76h.) The Board submitted lists of witnesses and Exhibits B1—
B96 in a timely manner. The Parent did not submit exhibits until the ﬁrst hearing day on
J anuary 9, 2014 and the documents were not properly labeled in accordance with the
Memorandum to Paities. Parent also attempted to submit for evidence a cell phone and a
digital recording device, which puiportedly contained a recording of a December 2012

l

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0262

PPT meeting. The Board objected to the admission of the recording device and personal
cell phone into evidence. The Parent made an offer of proof that the recording would
show that she asked for services that were refused. This hearing ofﬁcer ruled that the
Parent could use the recording to refresh her memory in preparing for testimony and to
confront the witnesses who were testifying about the December 2012 PPT. The Parent
stated that she understood, but did not use the recording during the hearing. At the end of
the hearing, Parent asked to play the recording and when this hearing ofﬁcer reminded
Parent that she could have used it to confront witnesses and she had not, she stated that

she misunderstood the order.

Student was also present to be a witness at the ﬁrst day of the hearing. The Board
objected to Student’s testimony citing concerns about the welfare of Student in missing
school and being subject to cross—examination. This hearing ofﬁcer asked the Parent to
state the purpose of the Student’s testimony. Parent stated that the Student could make
samples of writing. Parent also stated that if asked, the Student would testify that he liked
school and that he thought he was doing well in school. Parent stated that the Student
should hear the testimony because he “needs to face facts”, presumably as she believes
that Student is not doing well in school. Because this testimony would not have been
helpful in determining the issues in the case, this hearing ofﬁcer encouraged the Patent to
rethink the possible harm to the Student in missing school and being subject to cross
examination given that the Student’s testimony would not be helpful to determining the
legal issues in the case. Later in the morning, the Parent withdrew the Student as a

witness and sent Student to school.

Parent presented as a witness a privately engaged Occupational Therapist who was not
aware that she would be a witness at a hearing. The witness did not have the Student’s
complete record or her curriculum vitae in her possession. On cross examination by the
Board’s attorney, the witness agreed to send this material to the hearing in the afternoon
and return for further cross examination once the Board’s attomey had an opportunity to
review the material. The Occupational Therapist’s ﬁle and curriculum vitae were not
received in the aﬁernoon. The hearing was adjourned after a few short hours to allow the

Parent to re—label exhibits.

The hearing convened again on January 15, 2014. Many of the Parent’s exhibits were
mislabeled in a different way and did not match copies given to the Board or Hearing
Ofﬁcer. The hearing was adjourned for several hours so that the Parent exhibits could be
re-labeled. Aﬁer several hours, Parent appeared to be frustrated and stated that she would
withdraw the Hearing Request and re-ﬁle it on another day. I advised the Parent that since
the hearing had already commenced, a withdrawal of the Hearing Request would prejudice
the Parent’s ability to bring the same issues later. I asked the Parent to reconsider. The
Board’s attorney offered to provide the Parent with the extra copy of the Board’s version
of the Parent exhibits, which correlated with the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s Parent exhibits. l
encouraged the Parent to use this copy and re-label her exhibits after the hearing
adjourned. Thereaﬁer, the testimony recommenced with Parent as witness. The Parent
witness (Occupational Therapist) did not return to the hearing for eross—examination by

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0262

the Board. The Board moved to strike the Occupational Therapist’s testimony and the
Parent had no objection and withdrew the testimony from the record.

The hearing was convened on two other days, February 20 and March 17, 2014. The
Board presented ﬁve witnesses. They were the Assistant Director of Special Services; the
school psychologist who was also the case manager; and Student’s ﬁfth, sixth and seventh
grade special education teachers. On January 9, 2014, the mailing date of the Final
Decision was extended from January 22 to February 21, 2014 to add hearing dates. On
February 19, the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended to March 21, 2014 to
add a hearing date. On March 17, 2014, the mailing date of the Final Decision was
extended to April 18, 2014 in order to allow the parties to submit briefs and proposed
ﬁndings of fact by April 1, 2014. Both parties submitted ﬁndings of fact and conclusions
of law. However, while the Parent’s fact section cites a number of exhibits, some
references do not correlate to or have information that supports the Parent’s proposed
ﬁnding. In consideration to the fact that Parent is self—represented, in writing this Final
Decision and Order, I have carefully reviewed all Parent and Board exhibits to determine

if any would support the factual position of the Parent.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings of
facts and conclusions of law which reference cenain exhibits and witness testimony and
are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. A11 evidence presented
was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent the summary, procedural history
and ﬁndings of facts actually represent conclusions of law, they should so be considered
and vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. v. S & H Computer Systems, Ina, 605 F Supp. 816
(M.D. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp.

340 (SD, Tex. 1993).

SUMMARY:

The self-represented Parent brought this Hearing Request because she believes that the
Board failed to provide agpropriate programs in the 2011-2012 (Sth grade), 2012-2013 (6“1
grade) and 2013-2014 (7‘ grade) school years. Parent believes that the Student did not
make meaningful progress because the Student did not master his IEP goals. Parent
believes that Student is in the seventh grade but reading at a second grade level. Parent
believes that the Board did not follow the recommendations of Dr. David Suscovich’s
independent educational evaluation. Parent believes that the Board refused and did not
provide occupational therapy services as recommended by Dr. David Suscovich. Parent
believes that Student should have been placed in a small group classroom setting instead
of being in a regular classroom. Parent believes that Student should be placed in a private
placement. Board believes that it provided a free and appropriate education (“FAPE”) to
Student in the relevant school years. Board believes that it followed Dr. Suscovich’s
recommendations even though it was not obligated to do so in order to provide student

with FAPE.

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0262

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(C.G.S.) §10~76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §l415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act
(U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-l766 to 4-178, inclusive, §§4-l81a and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary
evidence and testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. The Student is currently twelve (12) years of age and attends the seventh (7m) grade at
City Hill Middle School. [Testimony, Parent] The Student is currently identiﬁed as
being eligible for and receiving special education services under the category of
Speciﬁc Learning Disability. [Exhibit B85]

2. The Student moved from New York City to Naugatuck in 2007 after his kindergarten
year. Student has been receiving special education services in the School District
continuously since ﬁrst grade. He attended Salem Elementary School for the ﬁrst to
fourth grade. He attended the Hillside Intermediate School in the ﬁfth and sixth
grades. [Testimony, Parent].

3. Parent initially referred the Student for evaluation. Parent was concerned that the
Student was reading at below grade level and provided the school with privately
obtained evaluations from the Kennedy Center and Mount Saint Ursula Speech Center
in New York City. The school conducted comprehensive evaluations that revealed the
presence of learning disabilities, speech and language impairment and problems with
attention. The Flaming and Placement Team (“PPT”) determined that Student was
eligible under the category of Learning Disabilities. [B7 to BIS]. The Student’s
Individualized Education Program (“IEP”) provided for three hours weekly of
individual/small group instruction for Student in the axeas of reading, writing, math in
the resource room and academic support in the regular education classroom. Student
also received individual instruction by a speech and language pathologist. Program
accommodations and modiﬁcations included, among other things, extra time on
tests/projects, oral testing, orally read tests/directions, reduced reading, modiﬁed
grades based on IEP, preferential seating and a number of instructional strategies. The
IEP also provided Student with special transportation services. [B15]

4. Student continuously received special education services from 2007-2008 to 2010-
2011 school years. In 2008, while Student was in the second grade, Student’s IEP
increased speech and language therapy and resource room services to four hours
weekly. [B22] Student received progress reports with modiﬁed grades. Later, in the
second grade year, the PPT revised the Student’s IEP to add academic instruction in
extended school year services. In Student’s third grade year, the PPT obtained a
psychiatric consultation by Dr. Ryan Loss to address Student lack of motivation and
problems with attention. Student was being negative toward schoolwork and had
difﬁculty managing his emotions. Student fought with Parent over homework
completion and extra work Parent was giving Student to do at home. Although the

4

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0262

Parent had good intentions, the Parent’s plan had backﬁred. Dr. Loss recommended
implementing a consistent school and home based reward system and for Parent to use
academic modiﬁcations at home, and counseling. [B29] The Parent has ignored Dr.
Ross’s recommendation and continues to have Student tutored after school for two
hours on a daily basis with unmodiﬁed worksheets from bookstores. [Testimony,
Parent]. The PPT also added speech and language service time to the extended school
year program and provided for accommodations for testing on the Connecticut
Mastery Tests (“GMT”). The CMTs are a statewide assessment based upon grade
level academic content. In the third grade, Student scored at Below Basic in reading
(144), math (163) and writing (151). [B31] Progress reports generally revealed
limited progress to satisfactory progress on Student IEP objectives. [B34]

5. In Student’s fourth grade year (December 2010), Parent shared a privately obtained
evaluation of Student by the Kennedy Center with school staff. The evaluation
recommended additional supports and modiﬁcations, many of which were already in
Student’s IEP. Apparently, the Kennedy Center evaluator had not reviewed the
Student’s IEP and Parent had inaccurately reported to the Kennedy Center that Student
was in a "general education setting 4"I grade classroom setting where he intermittently
receive[d] the support of a special education instructor in the class.” [B35] In fact, at
the time, Student was already receiving three hours weekly of individual or small
group instruction in the resource room in addition to the one hour of academic support
in the regular classroom. [B30]

6. In response to receiving the Kennedy Center evaluation, the school conducted
additional testing to determine the Student’s level of functioning. [B-36-42] The
Parent was invited to but did not provide information to the school psychologist in the
evaluation. [B44, Testimony, Parent] The PPT convened on December 21, 2010 to
conduct an annual review and to review testing. The Parent again expressed concern
about inadequate suppoxt in the classroom. The Parent also discussed social issues for
which social work services were offered but declined by the Parent. Academic
supports in the classroom were increased to ten hours per week in addition to three
hours of instruction in the resource room.

7. The PPT also provided for Student to take the CMT Modiﬁed Assessment System
(“CMT MAS”) for math and reading. The CMT is a statewide measure of student
perfonnance based upon grade level content. Special education students whose IEP
goals reﬂect instruction based on grade-level academic content and standards, but
whose disabilities preclude them from making enough progress to achieve grade—level
proﬁciency are eligible to take the CMT MAS. [B42] Student took the CMT MAS for
reading and math and CMT writing in March of 201 1. Scores for CMT MAS were not
included in the Board’s exhibits. Student scored 144 (below basic) in GMT writing.

[B46]

The School Years at Issue in this Due Process Hearing

8. On March 25, 2011, the Parent and Board participated in mediation and reached an
agreement that became part of Student’s educational record. The panties agreed that
the Board’s in-district reading expert would conduct a reading evaluation. The
evaluation would include a review of the educational record, Parent’s outside
evaluations, observation of Student in the resource room during reading instruction

5

April 14, 2014

10.

11.

Final Decision and Order 14-0262

and in the regular education classroom, intewiew the Parent and conduct needed
futther testing as the expeit deemed necessary. The evaluation would result in a repon
that would, among other things, include instructional recommendations as well as
recommendations for reading activities at home. [B50] The reading evaluation was
conducted and completed and the recommendations were incorporated into Student’s
individualized reading instruction program for the Student’s 2011-2012 (5lh grade)
school year. [Testimony G. Guerra]

Parent believes that Student did not receive an appropriate program because the ﬁfth
grade teacher was not experienced and told her she “did not know what else to do” to
teach Student. [Testimony, Parent; Parent proposed ﬁndings]. The ﬁfth grade special
education teacher had previous experience working as a special education teacher of
middle school students, like the Student, in a residential placement and at a large city
school district setting. She is a graduate of Boston University, a reputable national
university with a nationally ranked School of Education. At the time that she met
Student, she had already had ﬁve years of work experience as a special education
teacher to middle school students with special needs. She ﬁrst met Student when she
taught individualized reading and math to Student in the third grade as a substitute
special education teacher in the resource room. During the ﬁfth grade year, Student
received ﬁve hours of individualized math and ﬁve hours of individualized reading
from the teacher on a weekly basis. The teacher incorporated the recommendations
outlined in the in—district reading evaluation and made modiﬁcations as contained in
the Student’s IEP, including oral testing, rephrasing questions and extended time on
tests. [Testimony, G. Guerra].

It is likely that the Parent misunderstood what the teacher was trying to convey. The
teacher credibly testiﬁed that she discussed the Student’s lack of motivation with
Parent. Student was oﬁen tired and put his head down on the desk instead of attending
to tasks. Student had also told the teacher that he stayed up at night to help care for his
sister and was tired. The teacher had tried a number of techniques to motivate Student
that had not worked but she was trying new techniques. It is understandable that
Teacher would have expressed frustration over the Student’s lack of motivation to
Parent because Parent might be able to provide insight or assist with Student in some
way. In fact, according to Student’s report card, Student was frequently late to or
absent from school with 30 tardies and 15 absences. [B58] Measured against the total
number school days, Student was either absent or late approximately 25% of the time.
The frequent absences and tardies and lack of motivation would have negatively
impacted Student’s ability to progress.

Parent inferred that the teacher’s expression of fmstration meant that the teacher did
not know how to teach Student. This was not the case and the educational record does
not reﬂect this evidence. For instance, data from state and district assessments
documented steady progress in reading, writing and math. Student’s Connecticut
Degree of Reading Power (“DRP”) scores improved from 23 to 32 from fall 201 l to
spring 2012. Capital Region Education Council (“CREC”) reading assessments are a
statewide standard measure of progress in reading‘ CREC assessment of reading
comprehension, likewise, improved from fall (6) to winter (8) to spring (14)
[Testimony, G. Guerra, B99]. Student received grades of A, B, C and D with IEP
accommodations. The fact that Student’s grading was not modiﬁed, as it had been in

6

April 14, 2014

12,

13.

14.

15.

Final Decision and Order 14—0262

previous years, is evidence of the Student’s progress. [B5 8]. Fifth grade CMT results
(March 2012) in writing was at below basic (181) but an improvement over the fourth
grade CMT (March 2011) writing results (144). Furthermore, effects of the teacher’s
individual instruction and Student IEP were lasting. By mid-sixth grade year (March
2013), Student produced a writing score of 209 (basic), which was an improvement
over the fourth grade (below basic) score. Student also scored as proﬁcient reader on
the CMT MAS [B75], Student made meaningful progress in the ﬁfth grade and did
obtain educational beneﬁt from the 2011-2012 program. [B55, B46].

On March 28, 2012, the school sent notice of a PPT meeting scheduled on June 1 1,
2012 to conduct an annual review of the Student’s IEP. The Parent cancelled the
meeting and ﬁled 21 Due Process Hearing Request with the Department of Education.
[B56]. The school offered Resolution and parties entered into a Resolution Meeting
Agreement whereby the Board agreed to assume the ﬁnancial responsibility of an
independent educational evaluation to be reviewed at a subsequent PPT and Parent
agreed to withdraw the Hearing Request. [B—64] The parties agreed that David
Suscovich, PsyD., LMFT of Behavioral Health Center would conduct the independent
evaluation.

Dr. Suscovich completed a thorough evaluation and provided a detailed report dated
September 5, 2012, which became part of the educational record as Student’s triennial
evaluation. In conducting the evaluation, Dr. Suscovich reviewed the educational
record, including the Student’s previous IEPs and evaluations. The Suscovich report
diagnosed Student with learning disorders in reading (Dyslexia); written expression
(Dysgraphia); math; learning disorder NOS; functional reading Vision problems;
anxiety and depression secondary to learning and social struggles; grapho-motor
problems; low self-conﬂdence; risk of oppositional deﬁant disorder and R/O Central
Auditory Processing Disorder (CAPD). The report recommended further assessment
for CAPD; Grapho-Motor and Functional Vision as well as possible Sensory
Integration problems. The Academic interventions include certain teaching
techniques, frequent breaks, positive behavior reinforcements, cuing the student to stay
on task and “chunking”, also known as grouping, information into few bits to improve
Student’s ability to remember [B67]. Dr. Suscovich suggested a private placement if
the School could not integrate the academic interventions into the Student’s IEP.
Some of Dr. Suscovich’s recommendations were already being provided in Student’s
IEP in areas of individualized instruction and accommodations [854, p.19]. The new
and useful information the school staff gleaned from the Suscovich report was the
existence of possible Vision problems. As a result of this ﬁnding, the PPT addressed
vision tracking problems through modiﬁcations. [Testimony, L. Klimaszewski]

The Suscovich report recommended an assessment by an occupational therapist for
grapho-motor concerns. Grapho-motor problems were already addressed in the IEP.
[Testimony, L. Klimaszewski]. Instructional strategies recommended by Dr.
Suscovich were incorporated into Student’s new IEP. [B61]

Parent testiﬁed that she first became “aware” of the Student’s “problems” as a result of
the Suscovich repot’t. Parent spoke to Dr. Suscovich‘ by phone. He recommended that
parent consult a medical doctor regarding medication for Student’s ADHD; receive
training to understand the Student’s disabilities and an assessment by a Behavioral
Optometrist for vision tracking and organizational problems. The Parent consulted a

7

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0262

16.

17.

18.

19.

Behavior Optometrist who prescribed glasses for the Student and modiﬁcations for
testing in large font and bubbling answers. The PPT added these modiﬁcations to the
Student’s IEP. [B72—73; Testimony, L. Klimaszewski]. Dr. Suscovich also
recommended an occupational therapy consultation. [Testimony Parent].

Parent testiﬁed that in a December 2012 PPT, the school denied her request for
occupational therapy services and that Dr. Suscovich’s recommendations were not
incorporated into the IEP. At the end of the hearing, Parent attempted to enter into
evidence a tape recording, which purported to show that school staff refused to
provide occupational therapy services. [Testimony, Parent]. Dr. Suscovioh’s
recommendations for assessment had to do with dexterity and pen holding (grapho-
motor) and possible sensory integration issues. The school staff had already
incorporated modiﬁcations into IEPs to address grapho-motor issues. [B67;
Testimony, L. Klimaszewski]

At the December 2013 PPT, the school staff provided a list to show Parent what was
being done to incorporate Dr. Suscovich’s recommendations, including the grapho-
motor concerns, into the Student’s program. [B100; Testimony, L, Klimaszewski]
The Assistant Director of Special Services described the PPT as a “difﬁcult” meeting
with Parent “mistrust” and “misunderstanding”. The Parent wanted a guarantee that
the Student would master goals by a certain date, which the school staff could not
provide. The Parent would not accept the school’s explanations that the program was
nevertheless appropriate and that Student was making progress. [Testimony,
Klimaszewski]

Parent’s lack of training in special education methodologies and learning disabilities
contributed to her frustration. She testiﬁed that Student had not made any progress
because Smdent had not “shown me the work” that he had progressed. She thought
that school staff did not know that the Student had “dyslexia’. She ﬁrst learned the
term through the Suscovich report and assumed that the school staff did not know this
condition existed until the Suscovich report. “Dyslexia”, a term that describes a
reading disability, had never been used in previous evaluations. Notwithstanding the
lack of use of the term “dyslexia”, Student’s IEP had been addressing weaknesses due
to this reading disability since Student’s ﬁrst grade IEP.

Parent also did not understand that the purpose of some educational evaluations was
diagnostic of leaming disabilities and not assessments of academic performance in the
classroom. Parent relied on basic ideas such as grade equivalenoies in diagnostic tests
that are easier to understand than the standard or percentile scores that provide
meaning to special education professionals. [Testimony, Parent; Testimony, K. Maher]
During the hearing, Parent misinterpreted AIMS web progress monitoring data to
support her position of regression when the data actually showed that the Student was
keeping up with his non-disabled peers. [B80, B98, Testimony, Parent; Testimony, L.
Grazuna] Parent confused diagnostic testing of functioning with measuring grade
level academic performance. Parent also confused the purpose of IEP progress
monitoring as evaluations of academic performance. [Testimony, Maher; Testimony,
Parent; Parent proposed facts 11] Parent claims that the school did not make changes
over the years of special education to Student’s IEP and Student has never mastered
any goals. There is plentiful evidence that the PPTs made changes in goals and
objectives each year and that special education services were added to Student’s 1131’s

8

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0262

201

21.

when appropriate. Either Parent has not reviewed each IEP in detail or does not
understand how to read IBPs. Student’s IEP was not a static document. The IEPs in
the school years at issue presented a snapshot picture of the Student’s strengths and
weaknesses at that time and reﬂected the services that were being employed to address
those weaknesses. The Student’s IEPs were individualized to Student’s unique needs.
That Student did not master goals did not mean that he did not make progress. The
sixth grade special education teacher credibly testiﬁed that she did not mark the
Student as mastering certain objectives when she could have because she wanted
Student to keep practicing the skill so that it would not be lost. [Testimony, Grazuna]
The fact that a special education teacher chooses not to mark the student as having
mastered an objective because the teacher wants to be allowed to continue practicing a
skill with Student is a sign of a thoughtful and skillful, not an incompetent, teacher.
Parent also mistakenly believes that CMTs operate on a pass/fail system and that
Student has not yet “passed” the CMTS. [Parent’s “Closing Argument”, April 1,
2014]. [Testimony, Parent] Parent does not understand that people with severe
learning disabilities may nevertheless access grade level or higher—level content with
accommodations and modiﬁcations [Testimony, Parent] These complex ideas and the
purpose of various testing instruments could have been explained with the help of
school staff but the Parent refused to accept staff explanations because she lacked trust
in the staff. Parent’s mistrust fueled a breakdown in communication at the December
2012 PPT and thereafter, leading Parent to make unfounded accusations against school
staff. For instance, Parent testiﬁed that the Student’s good school grades and CMT
results had been falsiﬁed. [Testimony, Parent] There is no evidence of falsiﬁcation
by school staff or by state ofﬁcials grading the CMTs.

The Student’s 2012-2013 educational record reveals a steady climb in Student
academic performance that could be attributed in the Student’s lEP. Aﬁer the
Suscovich report, the PPT added social services to address issues of anxiety. [B69] In
December 2012, the PPT added a reading ﬂuency objective and added back hours for
individual instruction with math previously taken away at Parent’s request to put
Student in regular math. [B73, Testimony, G. Guerra] The Student’s sixth grade
report card reveals signiﬁcant growth in all academic areas. Whereas, Student’s report
card grades were B, C, and D, the end of the ﬁfth grade year, the sixth grade report
card shows growth in all areas. The sixth grade report card shows that Student is an
active participant in the class discussion and shows consistent effort. These results
show that Student experienced academic growth and was more motivated to succeed
than in previous years. [B84]. CRBC reading assessments show that Student had
improved his reading level from below basic in the fall to proﬁcient in the winter and
spring of the sixth grade year. [B90, B99] Furthermore, CMT scores in March of
sixth grade are consistent with other assessments. Student’s CMT writing score on
this statewide standard assessment was 209, the highest end of the basic, just two
points below the proﬁcient statewide level of writing. The Student scored at this range
against all students, including non-disabled sixth grade students, statewide. This is a
clear indication of academic progress. Student also scored at the high end of proﬁcient
on the CMT MAS, at a very close level to the statewide goal for reading. [B75] Even
though, Student scored 190, in the basic range and clearly needs continued special
education instruction in math, Student sub-scores on the CMT MAS showed mastery

9

April 14, 2014

22.

23.

24.

Final Decision and Order 14-0262

of some sixth grade content areas such as place value, basic facts, algebraic patterns
and tables, graphs and charts. Student has made meaningful progress and received
educational beneﬁt from the 2012-2013 program.

The PPT met on June 20, 2013 to plan Student’s seventh grade (2013-2014) IEP. The
Student’s special education teacher reviewed progress and reponed that Student’s
reading had improved such that Student could participate in two periods of Language
Arts with support of the special education teacher or paraprofessional; and that he
would continue to receive individualized math for remediation and instruction of basic
math skills. In the seventh grade year, Student receives 3.7 hours weekly 0f
individualized math instruction and 1.5 hours weekly of pull out academic support. In
addition, he receives 7.5 hours weekly of classroom suppmt by the special education
teacher or paraprofessional. Student also receives .5 hours of counseling and one
period (42) minutes of speech and language support weekly. In total Student receives
12.75 hours of special education services in a 32.5 hours school week. Student spends
almost 40% of school time with special educational instructional staff. Of the special
education hours, 5.25 hours are spent away from the regular education classroom for
direct instruction or support in an individualized or small group setting with a special
education teacher or paraprofessional. Student spends 42 minutes a week away from
the regular classroom for speech and language support. Student participates in
Science, History, specials (e.g. Physical Education and Alt), enrichment and lunch
with non-disabled students. The IEP has been revised to add goals and objectives.
[B85-86, B94]

Student’s seventh grade special education teacher provided detailed testimony about
Student’s active leadership participation in the regular classes as well as friendships
with his peers. The seventh grade special education teacher also reports that she has
observed Student as interested and engaged and enthusiastic about school activities.
For instance, Student participated in extracurricular activities with the ski club and
football. Student has taken leadership positions on projects with peers. In contrast to
the previously negative, anxious and moody ﬁfth grade Student, Student likes and
believes that he is doing well at school. Even the Parent conﬁrms this observation.
[Testimony, Parent; Testimony, D. Williams] Despite severe learning disabilities,
Student is attempting to access grade level books as independent reading. The fact
that Student would have chosen to read and asked Parent to purchase for reading The
Hunger Games, a popular middle school level book is a clear indication that Student is
confidently trying to access grade level material at home. [Testimony, L. Grazuna;
Testimony, D. Williams] Student’s increased enthusiasm and motivation, leadership
in class activities and participation in nonacademic areas such as sports as well as
positive school relationships are all indications of an appropriate individualized
educational program in the least restrictive environment. Therefore, I ﬁnd that Student
is being provided with an appropriate program for the 2013-2014 school year.

Lastly, Parent’s claim that Student is reading at a second grade level must be
addressed. In the summer of 2013, Parent brought Student again to the Kennedy
Center for private testing. Parent relies on the results of this evaluation to show that
Student had not progressed and is reading on a second grade level. By Summer 2013,
Student had had numerous evaluations beyond normal triennial reviews. Parent’s
anxiety and frustration over Student’s academic progress was the driving force behind

10

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0262

25.

26.

these many evaluations. Each time the Parent produced a private report, the school
would conduct further assessments. [B4—6, B8, B12, B14, B35, B40-4l, B44-4S, B50,
B67, B92] Undoubtedly, this frequency of evaluations negatively impacted Student’s
mood and attitude toward evaluations. It is easy to see how these assessments would
be laborious and depressing from a young student’s perspective. This would be
especially true when a child had to miss an extended school year program summer
paity in order to engage in testing and problem solving in a room with an unfamiliar
evaluator. [Testimony, L, Grazuna]

Parent believes this evaluation is proof of the inappropriateness of the Student’s
programs because it shows that Student has made no progress. [Testimony, Parent]
After reviewing the evaluation in light of entire educational record, I must disagree
with this view. The school’s psychologist credibly testiﬁed that this variability in
Student performance could be attributed to attentional weaknesses. [B67, Testimony,
K. Maher] In reviewing all evaluations, there is a lot of evidence that the Student‘s
poor motivation and mood directly impacted Student’s scores. [B4, B35, B92]
Student generally did poorly when tested by the Kennedy Center when Student was
unhappy. Kennedy Center examiners have noted that Student was unenthusiastic and
unmotivated. Kennedy Center evaluators described that the Student when engaging in
testing “became teary eyed” [B35] or “gave what appeared to be purposefully incorrect
answers” [B4] or “did not appear to take pleasure in testing ...and frequently
yawned.” [B~92] .
Supei'ﬂcially, the 2013 Kennedy Center report would seem to suggest that the Student
made no progress or had regressed. However, this hypothesis is proven untrue after a
careful review of the evaluation. For instance, the below average sub-scores in
reading accuracy and comprehension contradict the above average sub-scores in
reading ﬂuency‘ This suggests that the Student rushed through the reading passage
and was not paying attention. in fact, the idea that the Student would regress to a “2nd
grade reading level”, as the Parent claims, is at variance with Student’s score as a
proﬁcient reader in the 6‘" grade CMT MAS reading assessment. The math results (2"d
and 8th percentile), likewise, would even suggest that Student had regressed to an early
elementary basic level. However, this contradicts results from 6‘" grade CMTs where
Student had already mastered expected 6’h grade basic math facts. [B75] This
particular variance is a good example of how Student’s lack ofmotivation played a
role in this evaluation because the examiner also reported that Student had asked,
“How many more math pages do I haVe to do?” [B92] A picture emerges of a child
who did not want to be there to be tested on that day and who wanted to get the test
over with. I, therefore, cannot ﬁnd this evaluation to be reliable. F inally, no single
evaluation by itself can determine academic progress, especially when the purpose of
the evaluation is diagnostic of functioning and conducted by psychologists. I give
weight to teacher observations, progress reports, report cards and statewide DRP and
CMT scores, altogether, which can form a reliable picture of Student’s progress, which
has been steady and substantial given the complexity and severity of his disabilities.

ll

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0262

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

2.

The Student is eligible for special education and related services as set forth in the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C Sec 1401, et seq.

The Board has the burden of proving the appropriateness of the Student's program and
placement, which burden shall be met by a preponderance of the evidence (Regulation
of Connecticut State Agencies [R.C.S.A.] Sec 10-76h-14). The Board has met its
burden in this case.

The standard for determining whether a Board has provided a free appropriate public
education is set forth as a two-part inquiry in Board of Education of the Hendrick
Hudson Central School District v Rowley, 458 U S 176 (1982). The ﬁrst question to be
determined is whether the Board complied with the procedural requirements of the
Act? The second question to be determined is whether the Individualized Educational
Program is "reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational benefits?”
Rowley, 458 U S at 206-207.

As to the ﬁrst inquiry, there is no claim for and nothing in the record supports any
claim for a violation of the Parents‘ procedural rights.

As to the second inquiry of whether the USPS were reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational beneﬁts, the IDEA does not itself articulate any specific
level of educational beneﬁts that must be provided through an IEP. The Supreme
Court, however, has speciﬁcally rejected the contention that the "appropriate
education" mandated by IDEA requires states to "maximize the potential of
handicapped children " Walczak v Florida Union Free School District, 27 IDELR
1135 (2d Cir 1998), citing Rawley, supra; KP vJuzwic, 891 F Supp 703, 71 8 (D
Conn 1995). The IDEA requires "the door ofpublic education [to] be opened for a
disabled child in a "meaningful' way." Walczak, 142 F .3d at 130. However, it does not
guarantee ”everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents." 1d. at 132.
An appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress,
not regression. Id. The standard is whether the Student can derive meaningful
educational beneﬁt from the proposed program, not everything that might be thought
desirable by loving parents. Tucker v Bay Shore Union Free School District, 873 F 2d
563, 567 (2d Cir 1989). The Board provided programs that were likely to produce
progress. (See Findings ofFactNo. 8, 11, 13, 14, 21, 22)

Whether the program is "individualized on the basis of the student's assessment and
performance" is also considered when detennining the appropriateness of an IEP. See
AS v. Board of Education of West Hartﬁer, 35 IDELR 179 (D. Conn. 2001), afj’a’, 47
Fed. Appx. 615 (2d Cir. 2002) (citingMC. ex rel Mrs. C. v. Voluntown Bd. 0fEduc.,
122 F.Supp.2d 289, 292 n.6 (D. Conn. 2000). As required by the IDEA, the Board
reviewed Student’s needs at various PPTs on an individualized basis at appropriate
intervals. (See Findings of Fact No. 8, 21, 22)

The mandate in the IDEA that the IEP team “considers” the concerns of the Parents
does not require that it adopt whatever changes Parents request. 34 CPR.
§300.346(a)(i). The Board has complied with this requirement by considering the
Parent concerns at each PPT. The Board had no obligation to fulﬁll Parent’s desire for
occupational therapy services when it had already addressed grapho-motor issues
raised by Dr. Suscovich’s report. The Board investigated and adopted changes

12

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0262

9.

10.

ll.

requested by Parent even when the Board had no obligation to do so. (See Findings of
FactNo. 13,14,17)

When measuring progress, the Rowley Court determined that such objective factors as
"[t]he grading and advancement system" are important measures of acceptable
progress. Id. at 203. Further, "[w]hen the handicapped child is being educated in the
regular classrooms of a public school system, the achievement of passing marks and
advancement from grade to grade will be one important factor in determining
educational beneﬁt." Id. at 207 n.28. Parent cites MS. v. Board of Education of
Yonkers, 231 F .3d 96 (2Ml Cir.2000) for the legal proposition that a program can be
inappropriate even when the student has passing grades. The MS case does not apply
in this case. In the MS case, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a state review
ofﬁcer ﬁnding that the Board program was inappropriate when the student had passing
grades. In that case, the Board admitted that it had no baseline measures of student
performance to measure progress and the student’s IEP was incomplete. The Court
concluded that this lack of baseline data deprived the fact ﬁnder from determining
subsequent progress. Id. In contrast, here, Student’s IEPs properly documented
baseline data and the Board has documented progress reports showing that Student had
satisfactorily progressed in some skills and was working on new skills the next year.
The documented progress supports the conclusion that Student has obtained
meaningful beneﬁt from the 2011-2012; 2012-2013 and 2013—2014 programs and is
making meaningful and steady progress. (See Findings of Fact 11, 21, 22, 23)

In Mrs. B. v. Milford, 103 F.3d.l 14 (1997), the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in
interpreting Rowley noted that “[a] child's academic progress must be Viewed in light
of the limitations imposed by the child's disability." Student’s learning disabilities are
complex, interrelated and severe. Attentional difﬁculties also interfere with his ability
to learn. Given these severe and interrelated disabilities, progress has been slow but
steady. Student’s steadily improving academic perfonnance shows that the Board’s
programs were appropriate. (Findings of Fact No. 11, 13, 21)

In addition to the free appropriate public education requirement, IDEA‘S preference is
for disabled children to be educated in the least restrictive environment capable of
meeting their needs. Walczak, supra. IDEA sets fonh a strong congressional
preference for integrating children with disabilities in the regular classroom. (Oberti v
Board of Education, 995 F 2d 1204 (3d Cir 1993)). School districts must evaluate
whether a child with a disability can be educated in a regular classroom if provided
with supplementary aids and services. (Oberti, 995 F 2d at 1216, Mavis v Saba], 839
F Supp. 968, 985-986). The Act's least restrictive environment requirement is met
when the child with a disability is educated in the regular classroom, or when the child
who cannot be fully included is mainstreamed to the ”maximum extent possible."
Oberti, 995 F 2d at 1217. The Board has provided Student a free and appropriate
education in the least restrictive environment in the 201 1-2012; 2012-2013 and 2013—
2014 school years. (See Finding of Fact No. 11, 21, 22, 23)

13

April 14, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0262

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The IEPs of the 2011-2012, 2012-2013 and 2013—2014 school years were appropriate
and the Board provided Student with a free and appropriate education in the least

restrictive environment in these school years.
2. The Student derived meaningful beneﬁt from the above IEPS and made academic

progress.
3. Even though the Board was not legally obligated to do so, the Board considered and

adopted Dr. Suscovich’s recommendations, as they were appropriate to the Student’s

program.
4. Since the Board provided Student with FAPE for the 2011-2012, 2012-2013 and 2013-

2014 school years, it is not necessary to consider the issues 5 and 6 above, involving
the appropriateness and ﬁnancial support of out of district private placement.

COMMENTS ON THE CONDUCT OF THE HEARING, PURSUANT TO R.C.S.A.
§10-76h-16(b1
1. Even though the Parent had difﬁculty with the exhibits, the Parent ably represented
her position at the hearing and skillfully conducted cross-examination of Board

witnesses.
2. The Board’s attorney was professional, respectful, and considerate of the self

represented Patent.

14

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing officer within ﬁfteen days aﬂer'
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A)‘

ﬂ

xé/ﬂw

" - /’ .
Hearmg’Ofﬁcer $1 gnature

Sylvia Ho
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

