July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0545

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Region 6 Board ofEducation v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Liz Moyse, Esq.
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer D. Laviano, LLC

76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Are the Board’s speech and language, psycho—educational, reading and writing
evaluations appropriate? If not;

2. Is the Student entitled to independent speech and language, psycho-educational,
reading and writing evaluations?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education
(F APE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (1DEA) 20
U.S.C. §l401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents were not in agreement with
Board’s speech and language, psycho—educational, reading and writing evaluations. The Parents
requested independent evaluations at public expense. The Board refused the Parents’ request.
The parties agreed to mediate the matter. The mediation date was on July 2, 2014. The parties
were not able to resolve the matter. An impattial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on May 19, 2014
and a pre—hearing conference was held on May 27, 2014. A hearing date of June 18, 2014 was
chosen by the parties.

The Parent’s attorney sent an electronic transmission to the hearing ofﬁcer withdrawing the
matter without prejudice There was no objection by the Board. The date for the mailing of the

F inal Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the hearing date and the mediation date.
The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is August 1, 2014.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription 0fthe hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Comxecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

   

Hearing OfFZKESignahlre

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupage.doc (ho disk)
4mm

 

