March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0284

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Voluntown Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey
Kainen, Escalera and McHale, PC.
21 Oak Street
Hartford, CT 06106

Appearing before: Robeit L. Skelley, Esqt, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ESLJE—S:

Parents’ Issues:

1. Where is the stay-put placement for this Student?

2. Did the New London Board of Education (“Board”) deny the Student a free and appropriate
public education (“FAPE”) by failing to timely identify and evaluate the Student for the
academic year 2013—2014 in violation of the Board’s Child-Find obligations?

Board Issue:

3. Does this complaint satisfy the State and Federal requirements for a properly drafted
complaint as it does not offer a proposed resolution?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The complaint was ﬁled by the Parents on November 26, 2013. On December 11, 2013 the
Board ﬁled a Status Report, Countei‘claims and Request for Interim Order, in response to the
complaint. A prehearing conference was held on December 20, 2013. At the prehearing
conference, the issues in this matter were identiﬁed. The Parents made an oral request for a
thirty (30) day extension to the resolution period for settlement purposes, there was no objection
from the Board and the request was granted. The Parents raised a concern that the Board wouid
not allow the Student to remain in her current placement during the pendency of this matter. A
hearing on this issue was requested by the Parent, despite assurances from the Board that the
Board was not going to move the Student. Initially, the earliest hearing date that the Parties
could agree upon was January 30, 2014, as the Parents were not going to be available before
then. The Parties were instructed to provide the Hearing Ofﬁcer with information regarding the
current classroom placement of the Student and the identiﬁcation of any services that the Student
was being provided with. On December 23, 2013, the Board ﬁled a Memorandum in Support of
Challenge to the Sufﬁciency of the Complaint, stating that the Parents’ complaint was

 

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14~0284

insufﬁcient in that it failed to state a speciﬁc proposed resolution to the dispute as required under
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, §10~76h-3(d)(5). On December 26, 2013 the
Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a ruling on the Board’s sufﬁciency challenge, ﬁnding that the complaint
ﬁled by the Parent met the requirement for providing “a proposed resolution of the dispute to the
extent known and available to the parent at the time”. (Emphasis added) In regards to the issue
of stay-put, the Parents provided a class location, the name of a teacher and the services that the
Parent believed were being provided. The Board did not provide a response, due to a
malfunction in the email notiﬁcation process for the request. A decision was issued on January
5, 2014, detailing the placement and continued services that the Student was to receive during
the pendency of this matter. The Board has complied with that order, and has been providing the
same placement and services for the academic year. The Parties were unable to reach agreement
through the resolution period and proceeded to a due process hearing. The Due Process hearing
subsequently convened on February 19 and March 6, 2014.

SUMMARY:

The Parents brought this complaint following an initial PPT from which the Board was
recommending evaluations of the Student as well as changing the teacher and school building in
which the Student was initially enrolled. The Parents did not want the Student to be moved from
the class she was enrolled in, nor did they want a change in the services that the class was
currently getting. The consent to allow evaluations was signed, and then partially rescinded by
the Parents. The Parents were dismayed that the consent form called for a diagnostic placement,
which they would not consent to. The Board, at the preheating conference, stated that they
would remove the term diagnostic placement from the form; the Parent pointed out that it was
contained in other documents and that they were being told that the evaluations would be done in
a diagnostic placement. The Parties could not come to an agreement on how the consent form
for evaluation should be worded, despite several PPT meetings and several different iterations of
the consent form. The Parents sought advice from third parties, some of which made the
situation more confusing for all the Parties, and eventually prevented any agreement from being
reached. Both Parties agree that the Student has a disability, most likely Autism; both Parties
agree that evaluations are necessary; both Parties agree that services are needed.

The Complaint alleges that the Board was attempting to move the Student from the class that the
Student was assigned to, and thus stop the services that the Student received in that class, as a
result of the Parents requesting a due process hearing. While not clearly articulated, the
complaint written by the Parents essentially alleges a violation of stay-put under 20 U.S.C.
§1415G) and 34 CFR §300.518. Through the prehearing conference, the Parents fulther
articulated a denial of FAPE by the Board by failing to promptly identify and evaluate the
Student for special education and related services under the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (“IDEA”). 34 CFR §300.111; 20 U.S.C. §1401(3).

The Board moved to 1) either dismiss the Complaint because the Parent failed to properly
articulate a resolution to the dispute; or 2) require the Parent to amend the complaint with a more
fully articulated resolution proposal, citing Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies §lO-76h-

3(d)(5).

 

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0284

The Board presented 30 exhibits, marked B—l-B-30 respectively; the Parents presented 1 exhibit
marked P-l. One joint exhibit was entered with the agreement of the Board, marked B-22.
There were two Hearing Ofﬁcer exhibits (HO-l; HO—2).

The Board called one witness (Supervisor of Special Education); the Parent called two witnesses
(Parent and the Director of Student Services).

The ﬁndings of fact and conclusions set forth herein, which reference celtain exhibits and
witness testimony are not meant to exclude other supponting evidence in the record. All
evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter.

A11 motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled. To the extent
a procedural claim raised by the Board of Education 01' the Student is not speciﬁcally addressed
herein, this Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

T0 the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. For reference, see SAS
Institute, Inc. v. S&H Computer Systems, Inc. 605 F.Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie
Ann F v. Calallen Independent School District, 835 F.Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex.
1993).

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (“C.G.S.”)
§10-76h and related regulations; 20 United States Code (“U.S.C.”) §1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (“U.A.P.A.”),
C.G,S. §§4-176e to 4~178, inclusive, §§4-l81 and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:
The following facts are undisputed and are material to the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s decision.

1. Student is a ﬁve years and eight months old child, enrolled in a kindergarten class at the
Nathan Hale School in the New London Public School system.

2. The Student was new to the Board and had never been evaluated 01‘ identiﬁed as a child
eligible for special education services.

3. The enrollment questionnaire completed by the Parents, dated July 23, 2013, described
the Student (in pan) as “having speech delays; wears diapers and drinks bottles, autistic
stimming, trouble catching ball, needs toilet training—hourly program, needs pt, 0t,
st..”. (B-l).

4. A referral to determine eligibility for special education and related services was
completed by the Parents on August 6, 2013. (B-2) The referral described speciﬁc

 

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0284

10.

11.

concerns in the areas of motor skills, speech delays, social skills, ﬁne motor skills,
activities of daily living, self—stimulating behavior and visual issues. ([_d.)

A Planning and Placement Team (“PPT”) meeting was held on August 23, 2013. (B—4).
The individualized education program (“IEP”) developed at that 111eetingreconm1ended
conducting evaluations to determine eligibility; and also recommended a diagnostic
placement. ([1. Pg.2)

A Notice and Consent to Conduct an Initial Evaluation, outlining testing and evaluation
procedures, areas of assessment and evaluators was completed, however speciﬁc tests or
speciﬁc persomlel were not indicated, but rather generalized areas to be tested and titles
of proposed evaluators were used. The form was signed by the Parent on August 23,
2013. (B-S)

On the same date, August 23, 2013, the Parent then revoked consent for a diagnostic
placement at the Winthrop School but speciﬁcally stated in the revocation that the
consent to evaluate the child was not being revoked. (B—6) The remainder of that
speciﬁc consent has not been revoked as yet. (Record)

Based on the enrollment questionnaire and the referral to determine eligibility for special
education and related services completed by the Parent, the Board placed the child in a
special education class at the Nathan Hale School that was comprised of students with the
diagnosis of autism, where the Student remains. (Stipulation 0f the Board, 2/ 19/ 14, pg.

1 17, No. 4)

On August 29, 2013, the Parent clariﬁed their previous revocation, stating that the
revocations signed were not to be transferred to the Nathan Hale School, but were
effective only for the Winthrop School. The revocation speciﬁcally stated that the
Referral for Eligibility was not being revoked. (B-7)

On August 30, 2013, the Parents submitted a Referral to Determine Eligibility for Special
Education and Related Sewices to the Board. The referral was very speciﬁc in
identifying speciﬁc areas of concern in the areas of motor skills; speech delays; social
skill deﬁcits; self-stimulating behaviors; emotional difﬁculties; ﬁne motor skill deﬁcits
and activities of daily living skill deﬁcits. (B-10)

On September 30, 2013 a PPT meeting was convened, at which the Parents were present.
The resulting IEP, identifying Nathan Hale as the currently enrolled school, stated, in
part, to “plan and design evaluations to determine eligibility to include: classroom
observations, parent/teacher interview, developmental history, rating scales for autism,
behavior/social/emotional and standardized tests in the areas of cognitive processing,
academic achievement assessments, language assessments, assessments for ﬁne
motor/sensory processing and assessments for gross motor skills”. (B-13)

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0284

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

In the PPT meeting held on September 30, 2013, the Parents also expressed concern
about the Board’s use of the term “assessments as deemed appropriate” on the initial
evaluation consent form. The PPT offered to name the array of tests. (14., pg. 2)

On October 3, 2013 the Parents denied consent to conduct the evaluations recommended
at the September 30, 2013 PPT. (B-14)

The Board made repeated attempts in October to schedule a meeting with the Parents to
discuss the current placement of the Student in the Autism program; the Parent responded
by requesting time to obtain an advocate to assist them with the meeting. (B-20)

A meeting was scheduled for November 18, 2013, conﬁrmed with the parent advocate,
who sent an email of the meeting date and time to the Parents. (B-17) The meeting was
not convened because the Parents did not appear for the meeting. There was no response
to either text 01' phone calls made by the Board to the Parents. The Parents later stated
that there was no conﬁrmation of the meeting date. (B-20)

The Parents ﬁled a Due Process Complaint on November 22, 2013.

In response to a direction from the Hearing Ofﬁcer at the initial day of due process
hearing on February 19, 2013, the Board provided a Notice of Consent to Conduct An
Initial Evaluation listing speciﬁc evaluations, for speciﬁc areas ofassessment and listing
the speciﬁc evaluator for each evaluation. (B—30)

The Board, through its witness, the Supetvisor of Special Education Services for the New
London Public Schools, acknowledged that the Student had a disability, most likely
autism, that the Student would most likely be eligible for special education and related
services, and that the Student would most likely be in an autism speciﬁc classroom.
(Testimony, Supervisor ol‘Special Education Sewices; pg. 184, No. 15 through pg. 185,
No. 4)

The Board, through Counsel at the close of the due process hearing, requested an order
specifying the evaluations to be completed for the Student and agreed to a request by the
Parent to specify a speciﬁc school psychologist to conduct all portions of the
comprehensive evaluation that would be completed by a school psychologist.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

This administrative hearing was commenced pursuant to the IDEA and applicable
Connecticut special education law. Pursuant to the IDEA, a local educational agency
(“LEA”) is responsible for providing disabled children within its jurisdiction with a free
and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) in the least restrictive environment (“LRE”).
See 20 U.S.C. §§ l412(a)(1); l412(a)(5)(A). When there is a disagreement between the
parents of such a child and the LEA over whether the LEA has satisﬁed its obligations
under the IDEA, the parents may commence a special education due process hearing and

 

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0284

thereafter seek review of the hearing ofﬁcer’s decision by a court it‘they are aggrieved by
that decision.

2. Under the IDEA, when the parents of a child challenge a special education program
proposed by an LEA, the issue to be resolved is whether the LEA’s proposed program
provides the child with a FAPE as determined by applying the two prong test stated in
Board quducation Q/Heltdi'ick Hudson School District v. Rawley, 458 US. 176, 206-
207 (1982)

3. Under Rowley, the Board’s program would provide the Student with a FAPE if the
proposed individualized education program (“IEP”): (1) was developed in compliance
with the IDEA’s procedural requirements; and (2) was “reasonably calculated to enable
[the Student] to receive educational beneﬁts,” or, in other words, “likely” to produce
more than a trivial or de minimis progress. 1d. The IDEA does not require that the Board
provide the best program money can buy 01‘ provide a program that has all of the features
that the Parents desire.

4. The subject matter jurisdiction of‘lDEA due process hearings and impartial hearing
ofﬁcers is deﬁned under state and federal law. The IDEA states that impartial hearing
ofﬁcers and due process hearings are to decide issues outlined in 20 U.S.C.
§1415(b)(6)(A) 01' (k)l. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(b)(6)(A) deﬁnes the subject matter as
“matter[s] relating to the identiﬁcation, evaluation, or educationalp/acemem oflhe
child, or the provision of a_ﬁ'ee and appropriate public education to such child”. 20 US.
Cl §1415(b)(6)(A) and see also, 20 U.S.C. §1415(ﬂ(1)(A), The hearings are a means of
resolving complaints when an LEA either “(A) proposes to initiate or change; or (B)
refuses to initiate or change, the identiﬁcation, evaluation, or educalionalplacement (2f
the child, or [he provision ofaﬂ‘ee appropriate public education to the child. ” 20 U.S.C.
§ 1415(b)(7)(A)(111).

5. The IDEA requires parental consent for ceitain activities by the LEA. Pursuant to 34
CFR §300.300, the LEA must obtain parental consent in order to conduct an initial
evaluation to determine if a child qualiﬁes as a child with a disability under §300.8. The
Board made an immediate attempt to obtain parental consent upon the initial referral by
the Parent on August 6, 2013, scheduling a PPT meeting for August 16, 2013. (B-2, B-3)
On August 23, 2013, the Parent signed the notice and consent form provided by the
Board, to allow the Board to conduct the initial evaluation, which the Parent then
partially revoked. (Finding of Fact No. 6) The Board then scheduled another PPT
meeting for September 30, 2013, which the Parents attended, and at which another
consent form for initial evaluation was provided. (B-l3) The September 30, 2013 Notice
and Consent form again provided generalized information regarding the types of
evaluations to be completed and the evaluator who would do the evaluations. (B—14,
Finding of Fact No. 13) The Parents declined to give consent to the Board to conduct an
initial evaluation. (I_d.)

1 Due Process Hearing Officers also have jurisdiction to decide issues involving alternative educational settings
under 20 U.S.C. §1415(k)1 The present Due Process Complaint does not raise any issues relating to alternative
educational settings and thus, no discussion is required

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0284

6. A Connecticut Hearing Ofﬁcer, acting pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes §10—76h
(d)(1), has the authority to order an evaluation of a student. §10-76h(d)(1) states, in
pertinent part, “In the case where a parent or guardian, 01' pupil if such pupil is an
emancipated minor or is eighteen years of age 01' older, or a surrogate parent appointed
pursuant to section 10-94g, has refused consent for initial evaluation or reevaluation, the
hearing ofﬁcer or board may order an initial evaluation or reevaluation without the
consent of such parent, guardian, pupil or surrogate parent except that if the parent,
guardian, pupil 01' surrogate parent appeals such decision pursuant to subdivision (4) of
this subsection, the child or pupil may not be evaluated or placed pending the disposition
ofthe appeal. . . .”.

7. The Board, in the proposed IEP developed on August 23, 2013, recommended initial
evaluations of the Student for identiﬁcation and eligibility for special education and
related services, and identiﬁed the current placement of the Student at Nathan Hale
School. (B—4) The Board provided a Notice of Consent to evaluate the Student, dated
August 23, 2013 and signed by the Parent, in which the evaluation procedures were
identiﬁed in generalized terms (observation, rating scales, tests deemed appropriate); and
the proposed evaluator was identiﬁed by area of specialty, not by name. (B-S) The
Board also provided to the Parents, on August 23, 2013, consent for Special Education
Placement, which was signed by the Parent, for a “diagnostic placement” at Winthrop
School. The diagnostic placement would be a change of placement as Winthrop School
was not the current placement of the Student at the time that the due process complaint
was ﬁled. (F inding of Fact No. 1)

8. The Parties are involved in an administrative proceeding whereby a due process hearing
has been requested under §300.5071 Typically the pendency placement requires the
Board to maintain the placement and services that the Student has been receiving
pursuant to the last valid, accepted IEP. This Student has never had an IEP at this point.
(Finding of F act No. 2) However, the Student does have a placement and services that
were tacitly agreed upon by the Board and the Parents, with the placement and services
being provided for at least the previous two quarters of the academic year. The results of
an evaluation may lead to a determination regarding the appropriateness of that
placement and services, but for the purposes of the pendency placement, the placement
and services were established, accepted and being provided to this Student. The Parents
identified the program and placement as the Nathan Hale School, in a small classroom of
eight students, instructed by Mrs. Eskra, apparently with additional sewices being
provided by a Board contractor, Creative Interventions, LLC. The sewices were
identiﬁed as “autism specialty sewices, 3X per week, ABA consultative services,
functional training and supervisory sewices, ABA therapy (language, social, and self-
l1elp skills), in addition to cognitive and motor skills.” The Board did not refute the
Parents’ description of the placement or the sewices being offered, other than to state that
it was not a special education placement and the services provided were not pursuant to
an IEP. (Stipulation of the Board, 2/19/14, pg. 117, N0. 4)

9. The pendency placement issue was resolved with the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s order, issued on
January 5, 2014, ordering the Board to maintain the Student in the classroom placement

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0284

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

the Student was originally placed in by the Board at the beginning of the school year, and
to continue providing all services that the Student was receiving during the school year
leading up to the ﬁling of the complaint for due process. (Hearing Ofﬁcer Motion
Decision, dated January 5, 2014) The Board has continued to maintain that placement
and services throughout the pendency of this matter and stated through counsel that they
would continue that placement and sewices through the completion of the evaluation and
identiﬁcation process.

The Due Process Complaint further alleges that the Board denied the Student a FAPE by
failing to promptly evaluate and identify the Student for special education and related
services in Violation of the Board’s Child Find obligations. Child Find, as promulgated
by 34 CFR §300.311, places an obligation on the part of a Local Educational Agency
(“LEA”) to locate, identify and evaluate all children with disabilities residing within the

j urisdiction that either have, or are suspected of having, disabilities and need special

education as a result of those disabilities. Children who are identiﬁed as having a
disability under 34 CF R §300.8 and in need of special education are also subject to the
Child Find obligations. Autism is a disability deﬁned under §300.8 as “ a developmental
disability signiﬁcantly affecting verbal and non—Verbal communication and social
interaction, generally evident before age three, that adversely affects a child’s educational
performance. Other characteristics oﬁen associated with autism are engagement in
repetitive activities and stereotyped movements, resistance to environmental change or
change in daily routines, and unusual responses to sensory experiences.”

The Board was aware of the difﬁculties presented by the Student and identiﬁed by the
Parent in both the initial em‘ollment questionnaire for kindergaiten, as well as the referral
for special education and related services form. (B-l, B-2, and B-10) Indeed, the Board
agreed with the Parents that the Student was disabled, most likely with the disability of
autism, and would most likely need special education and related sewices. The Parties
do not disagree on the informal identiﬁcation of the Student.

The Board then scheduled a PPT meeting for November 18, 2013 in agreement with a
parent advocate, who then emailed the date and time of the PPT to the Parents. (B-17)
The meeting was not held as the Parents did not attend the meeting, claiming that they
were unaware that it had been conﬁrmed. The meeting was re~scheduled for November
22, 2013, in which the Parents did appear, without a parent advocate. It was at this
meeting that the Board informed the Parents that the Student would be moved from the
Student’s current class as the Student was not identiﬁed as a special education student,
nor was the Student identiﬁed as having the disability of autism. (HO-I)

On November 22, 2013, the Parents ﬁled the complaint for a due process hearing.

1 ﬁnd that the Board has not violated its afﬁrmative obligation under Child Find, to locate
the Student, nor has it failed to {attempt to} identify or evaluate the Student for lack of
making a “i'easonable effort to obtain the informed consent of the parent.” in this matter.
34 CFR. §300.300(a)(iii) The Parents have been unable to provide a format under
which the Notice and Consent to Conduct an Initial Evaluation form would be acceptable

March 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0284

to them and to the Board. Indeed, even during the due process hearing the Board would
attempt to ascertain just how the Parents wanted the language on the form to read, only to
ﬁnd that each of the iterations asked for by the Parents had already been rejected by the
Parents

15, I ﬁnd that the Board did not deny the Student a free and appropriate public education for
the 2013-2014 academic years.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The issue of the pendency placement has been resolved through the Hearing Ofﬁcer
Motion Decision dated January 5, 2014, for the purposes of the Final Decision and Order;
the pendency placement shall remain consistent with that order for the duration of the
evaluation and identification process. There was no detrimental effect to the Student
from the attempt to move the Student prior to that order, so there is no need to address
any further remedy for the pendency placement issue.

The Board is ordered to conduct an initial evaluation of the Student utilizing the
following evaluations and personnel, all of which were identiﬁed by the Board as being
the evaluations that they would utilize:
1. Gilliam Autism Rating Scale; BASC~2, Social Skills Improvement System,
Adaptive Behavior Assessment System for Children, Obsetvations and
Developmental History — to be evaluated by Heather Parsons, School Psychologist.

2. PPVT, EVT, language sample, Observation ~ evaluated by Laurie Wright, Speech
Pathologist.

3. TERA, TEMA — evaluated by Debbie Eskra, Special Education teacher.

4. Sensory Proﬁle, Peabody Dev. Motor Scales, observation — evaluated by Tracey
Oltavera, OT.

5. School Function Assessment, Briganee Diagnostic Inventory, Obsewation e
evaluated by Mary Kilcommons, PT.

The evaluations should commence as quickly as the Board can arrange for them to occur,
and the Student is to remain in the current placement until the evaluations and subsequent
identiﬁcation, if so found, is completed.

As an aside to the ﬁnal order, it was clear through the testimony of the Parents that they
were acting in what they believed to be the best interests ofthe Student and that however
misinformed their information may have been, their goal was to provide the Student with
the best situation they, as parents, could obtain. It was an arduous task for all of the
Patties to get to the point of hearing; it would behoove the Parties to set aside the
hardships of the journey and collaboratively work towards forging a working relationship
for the beneﬁt of the Student.

 

12/15/2811 13: 26 8667743617 INNOVATIVE LEGAL PAGE 81/61

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing Special educatioa for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬂer
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of me hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Comecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A). .

    

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name .in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

