May 9, 2014 Final Decision and Order: 14—0511

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v, Bristol Board of Education
Appearing on behalf 01‘ the Parent: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Ms. Kim Hapken
Bristol Board of Education
129 Church Street
Bristol, CT 06604

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

This matter was withdrawn by the Parent within two days of having ﬁled the complaint.
There was no preheating conference held, and as such, the issues were not formally
agreed upon.

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent ﬁled the complaint on May 6, 2014. The Hearing Ofﬁcer sent out an email to
the Parties on May 6, 2014, attempting to schedule a prehearing conference for the next
day to address any placement issues that may have arisen as a result of the ﬁling of the
complaint. On May 6, 2014 the Parent indicated Via email that she was not able to
participate in the preheating conference at the times offered due to prior scheduled
appointments. Shortly after sending that email, the Parent sent another email indicating
that she was withdrawing the complaint, On May 7, 2014, the Parent sent another email
stating that she wished to withdraw the complaint.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The Parent has withdrawn the due process complaint. With no ﬁu’ther issues to be
decided, this matter is DISMISSED without prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board ofeducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for '
providing Specm education for the student rcquin'ng special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
receipt thereof; Ihe State Board ofEduca‘tion shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or pr'escription‘ oftho hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to, state or federal
com by cithcrparty in accordance with thc_provis'ions ofScction 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code I415(i)(2)(A). ‘ ‘

   

Hearbug Ofﬁcer Signature

Robert L. Skellcy, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer Namcin Prim.

 

