December 16,2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0216

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Winchester Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents

Appearing on behalf ofthe Board: Attorney Mark Sommaruga
Pullman and Connolly, LLC
90 State House Square
Hartford, CT 06103-3702

Appearing before: Attorney Brette Hi Fitton
Hearing Officer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board deny the Student a Free Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”) by:
a. incorrectly identifying Student’s primary diagnosis; and/or
b, failing to develop and/or implement an appropriate Individualized Educational
Program (“IEP”) with necessary supports and services?

2. Did the Board commit procedural violations, including but not limited to, failing to
complete IEP documents in a timely manner, failing to produce accurate IEP
documents, and/or failing to produce fully completed IEP documents?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On October 17, 2013, the Winchester Board of Education received a Request for a Special
Education Due Process Heating and the undersigned hearing officer was appointed. On
November 6, 2013, a prehearing conference was held, during which hearing dates were set and

the deadline For mailing the ﬁnal decision and order was established as December 31, 2013, On
December 13, 2013, Counsel for the Parents withdrew the hearing request.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light ofthe above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board ofeducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the studentrequhing special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hean'ng ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall také appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing officer may he made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(1)(2)(A). ’

ﬂ. , ,, 2v
#9, 1';/ ﬂ/// / /‘. .
r/V/z/m- ”(?Z/mv

'/"Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

Bethe H. FHOW

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name-in Print

signpagcdoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

