December 30, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14-0510

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Gerry McMahon, Esq.
Danielle McGee
Law Ofﬁces of Gerry McMahon, LLC
98 Mill Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT 06811

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Abby Wadler, Esq.
Assistant Town Counsel
Town of Greenwich
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board offer an appropriate program to Student by requesting a Diagnostic Placement?

2. Did the Board have sufﬁcient information to develop an Individualized Education Program

(“IEP”) for Student?

Is Eagle Hill School an appropriate placement for Student?

4. 1f Eagle Hill is an appropriate placement for Student, should the Parents be reimbursed for the
costs of tuition and education related expenses?

L»)

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request on May 2, 2014, which was received
by the Board on May 5, 2014. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on May 6, 2014 and conducted a
Prehearing Conference on May 16, 2014 wherein the hearing issues above were identiﬁed and an
initial hearing date was scheduled for July 9, 2014. On J une 24, the hearing was postponed to July
24, 2014 so that the parties could engage in voluntary mediation with a state appointed mediator.

The hearing convened on July 24, September 4, September 11, October 8, October 14, October 27
and November 12, 2014. The Parents presented four witnesses. They were the Mother; Roger
Rahtz, M.D., Student’s Psychiatrist; Julie Rosenberg, Private Speech and Language Pathologist; and
Colleen Alfano, Central Middle School Guidance Counselor. The Board presented four witnesses.
They were Scott McCarthy PhD, Central Middle School School Psychologist; Carolyn Hoette,
Central Middle School Special Education Teacher; Karen Mabee, former Central Middle School
Assistant Principal and J 0 Frame, Central Middle School Assistant Principal.

 

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0510

The Board’s exhibits B-1 to B—18 were admitted as full exhibits. The Parent exhibits P-7 to P42
were admitted as full exhibits. Exhibits P-19; P—22-35 were admitted over the Board’s objection
taking into consideration that these exhibits were not previously reviewed by the Board in the
decision making process. Exhibits P-1 to P—6 were marked for identiﬁcation purposes only. The
Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request was admitted as HO-l. The paities’ Joint Stipulation of
Facts was read into the record and admitted as HO—2. At the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s request, the Board
produced a copy of the Student’s enrollment form and accompanying 1etter from the Board’s
Attorney explaining the documentation that the Board had in its possession at a June 26, 2014
Flaming and Placement Team meeting (“PPT”). The enroIlment form was admitted as HO-3.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the parties’ requests for extension of the mailing dates of the Final
Decision as follows: On J une 24, 2014, the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended from
July 23, 2014 to August 15, 2014 to postpone the hearing date and allow the parties to engage in
settlement negotiation. On July 24, 2014, the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended to
September 12, 2014 to add hearing dates. On September 5, 2014, the mailing date of the Final
Decision was extended to October 10, 2014 to add hearing dates. On October 8, 2014, the mailing
date of the Final Decision was extended to November 17, 2014 to add hearing dates. On October
22, 2014, the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended to December 5, 2014 in order to
allow time for the completion of transcripts of the hearing. On November 12, 2014, the mailing
date of the Final Decision was extended to Januaiy 2, 2015 to allow the parties to submit briefs and
proposed ﬁndings of fact by December 10, 2014. Both patties submitted briefs on December 10,
2014.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law set foith herein, which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony and

are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was
considered in deciding this matter. T0 the extent the summary, procedural histmy and ﬁndings of
fact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered and Vice versa. See SAS
Institute Inc, v, S & [-1 Computer Systems, Inc, 605 F . Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie
Ann F. Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993). All motions that
were not previously ruled upon are hereby denied.

SUMMARY: ,

The issues in this Due Process hearing involve whether the Board failed to provide a free and
appropriate public education to a student with a111EP who was transferring from a New York public
agency when it offered a trial placement for diagnostic purposes in the regular education classroom
pursuant to RCSA 10—76d—14. The Parents allege that the trial placement for diagnostic purposes
was an inappropriate program because the Parent had provided the Board with sufﬁcient
information to develop an individualized education program for Student. Parents allege that if the
Board needed additional information it shouid have offered extended school year services for
Student. Parents are seeking reimbursement for tuition and education related expenses of Student at
Eagle Hill School in Greenwich, Connecticut.

 

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0510

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10—
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4—176e to 4—178,
inclusive, §§4-181a and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. Student was born on August 4, 2000 and currently lives in the town of Greenwich. (Stipulation
of Facts).

2. The Student lived in and attended school in New York City as a student of the New York City
Board of Education prior to moving to his cun‘ent residence in Greenwich. (Testimony,
Mother).

3. As of May 2013, the New York City educational agency had identiﬁed Student as qualifying for
special education under the category of “Emotional Disturbance” and had placed Student in a
self contained classroom at Summit School (“Summit”), a New York State approved nonpublic
day school. (Stipulation of Facts).

4. The family made the decision to move to Greenwich after a difﬁcult year. The family
experienced ﬁnancial struggles due to signiﬁcant changes in the Father’s employment. The
Student was experiencing this stress at home and was snuggling at home and school.
(Testimony, Mother)

5. The Mother registered Student in Greenwich Public Schools (“GPS”) on June 7, 2013, when
classes were in progress in the 2012-2013 school year. The Mother indicated on the registration
form that that the Student was to begin at Central Middle School (“CMS”) in the 7th grade
beginning in September of 2013. The Mother provided medical and residency information, but
did not provide an lEP at the time of the registration.” (HO-3)

6. At the time that Mother registered Student, the family had not physically moved to Greenwich.
The family had ﬁnished the closing on their Greenwich home a day earlier on June 6, 2013.
The Student was not present on June 7 when the Mother registered the Student for school. He
ﬁnished the school year at Summit in New York City. After the Mother registered the Student,
the CMS guidance counselor gave the Mother a shott tour of CMS. The Mother Visited the
ofﬁces, saw the cafeteria and was present during the change of classes. (Testimony, Mother).

7. A Flaming and Placement Team Meeting (“PPT”) was held on June 26, 2013. The members of
the PPT, in addition to the Mother, were Dr. Jo Frame (administrator); Carolyn Hoette (special
education teacher); Kevin Krois (regular education teacher); Dr. Scott McCarthy (school
psychologist); Julie Webster (speech and language pathologist); Colleen Alfano (guidance
counselor) and Sheri Bordoff (Clinical Director of Summit School), who participated by phone.
The Mother was provided procedural safeguards and signed a waiver of 5—day notice for
permission for the PPT to take place. (B—3).

 

December 30, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14-0510

8.

10.

11.

The Board had been provided two IEPs by Summit. One lEP, dated March 6, 2012 was
developed when Student was in Grade 5 (B-l). Another IEP, dated May 24, 2013, was
developed at the end of the 6th grade year. This lEP was faxed to the school two days before the
scheduled PPT. (8—2). In addition, the PPT reviewed a report of a neuropsychological
evaluation conducted by Dr. Andrew Mon‘ell PhD dated 2011 when Student was 11 years of
age. In his report, D11 M01Tell noted that the

[Student] is a boy of superior intellectual ability who is only intermittently able to function
at the level of his potential owing to his uneven attention, motivation and frustration
tolerance. His greatest cognitive skills lie in his reasoning and his visual spatial problem
solving abilities, while relevant vulnerabilities were noted in his expressive language, his
graphomotor facility and his attentional/executive skills. Academically, [Student] is a
competent reader. His math skills seem potentially quite good as well...W1‘iting is the
area of greatest concern and the one where he is in need of additional suppmt and
encouragement. Finally, while [Student] is at present conﬂicted over how fully he wants
to participate in the world around him, he ultimately comes across as someone who is
looking to make positive changes in all areas of his life.”

Dr. Morrell’s recommendation included individual and group therapy as well as speech and
language therapy to help Student with his expressive and written expression. (B-6).

Summit’s lEP dated May 24, 2013 was being implemented at the time of the PPT meeting. This
IEP placed the Student in a self—contained classroom with a student to teacher and aide ratio of
12:l+1 ﬁve days a week for 7 periods per day. In addition, the Student received 1 to l
psychological counseling services for .5 hours per week; 3 to 1 psychological counseling
seiyices for .5 hours per week; 3:1 speech/language services for .5 hours per week; 3 to l
occupational therapy sewices for .5 hours twice per week and a Behavioral Intervention Plan
(“B1P), which was not sent by Summit. The IEP did not include extended school year services.
(Stipulation of Facts; B-2).

Academic performance was an area of strength for Student. The IEP reported Student’s 6‘“
grade standardized test performance on district-wide assessments to be at a 6.7 grade level in
math and 7.4 grade level in reading. The Student is described as exhibiting strong academic
skills and “making good progress”. With regard to social development, the Student was
described as “a happy and pleasant boy”; who “prefers to be on his own”; who “struggles with
expressing his needs in an appropriate way”; who “requires prompting” and who “[a]t times will
scream and cry and needs to be removed from class”. Areas of need included improving focus;
coping strategies; improving self—advocacy; developing problem solving and organizational
skills and developing strategies to reduce stress and anxiety. The writers of the Summit IEP did
not speciﬁcally alticulate why Student needed to be educated within a separate school setting
from non-disabled peers beyond stating that Student“1‘equi1‘es a highly specialized program with
support services not available in a public school to meet his educational needs.” (B-2)

The Parent and Summit’s Clinical Director repoited that the Student was struggling in the
specialized setting at Summit. Student was feeling different. The Student had negative
reactions to some of the counseling services he was receiving in the specialized environment.
The Student had threatened to harm himself in the previous year. The goal was for Student to
be mainstreamed but both Summit’s Clinical Director and the Mother expressed concern about
the mainstream environment and the need for skilled staff to work with Student on a consistent

4

 

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0510

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

basis. During the PPT meeting, the Mother provided the team with permission to contact the
Student’s psychiatrist, Dr. Rahtz. (Testimony, Mother; Testimony, McCarthy; Testimony,
Hoette; B—3).

The Board PPT members felt that CMS had sufﬁcient clinical resources to meet the Student’s
behavioral and emotional needs. Dr. McCarthy, the school psychologist would be available to
support the Student In addition to Dr. McCarthy, CMS’s clinical staff included a social worker
and a counselor specializing in children in crisis. CMS also had three guidance counselors
available to support Student. Based upon information that was provided, Dr. McCarthy
determined that the Student’s emotional and behavioral proﬁle was similar to a number of other
CMS students being served by clinical and special education staff. Dr. McCarthy did not
consider Student’s emotional and behavioral needs so extraordinary that he could not be served
with CMS’s then current clinical resources. (Testimony, McCarthy)

The PPT proposed a diagnostic placement for the Student to occur at the beginning of the next
school year because CMS staff lacked sufﬁcient information as to how the Student’s IEP would
be implemented in a mainstream setting. The staff was not clear as to the type of services that
would be required to meet the Student’s needs. During the diagnostic placement, the Summit
IEP would be in place at CMS and CMS staff would closely monitor and evaluate Student to
learn about the Student’s emotional and behavioral responses and adjust services as necessary to
meet the Student’s needs. The team proposed to match the services and goals provided in the
Student’s Summit IEP during this evaluation period. The PPT team would meet every two
weeks or earlier to review the Student’s needs for speciﬁc services. In addition, the PPT offered
a shortened school day to allow Student to adjust to the new school environment. The Mother
rejected the team’s offer to shorten the school day to ease the transition to school and the full
number of counseling sessions contained in the Summit IEP because she felt that Student would
feel different and have a negative response. (Testimony, McCarthy; Testimony, Hoette)

The special education teacher and school psychologist felt that the biggest questions that needed
to be answered during the diagnostic placement involved the Student’s response to the
mainstream school environment after having been in a restrictive specialized school setting.
During the course of the diagnostic placement, the school psychologist would monitor the
Student’s behavior closely. Diagnostic evaluations of Student that the team proposed would
occur during academic/special education, speech and language therapy and counseling sessions.
(Testimony, McCarthy; Testimony, Hoette)

The Board members of the PPT also offered an in home visit and to obseive the Student over
the summer in order to become acquainted with Student. The Mother was non—committal in
giving consent for CMS staff to meet the Student. At the conclusion of the PPT, the Mother
took the papers home for review. (Testimony, McCarthy; Testimony, Hoette; B-3)

On Sunday, June 30, 2013, a few days after the PPT, the Mother emailed Dr. J 0 Frame,
Assistant Principal at CMS, stating that the Parents were concerned that the diagnostic
placement was not an appropriate placement for Student. The Mother stated, “[a]s you know
from the information we and The Summit School provided at the PPT meeting, [Student] has
been in a 12:1 specialized out of district placement for the last several years. Even in such a
restrictive environment, he has struggled to make educational progress.” It is important to note
here that the Mother’s statement that the Student had “struggled to make educational progress”
is contrary to the results repmted in Summit’s May 24, 2013 IEP, and therefore lacks any
credibility on this point. Although the Summit IEP outlined some behavioral issues, the Student

5

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0510

17.

18.

19.

201

21.

22.

was described as making “good progress? Furthermore, district-wide standardized assessments
revealed that the Student was performing at above grade level as compared to all students,
disabled and non-disabled. (B—3; B—9)

Dr. Frame emailed back on July 1 that she had forwarded the Mother’s email to the Special
Education depaitinent and later on J uly 10 offering to schedule another PPT meeting to discuss
the Parents’ concerns. On July 11, the Mother wrote back and stated as follows: “Given that
[Student] had such a difﬁcult year, we decided to have him evaluated again. Dr. Tim Heitzman
of the Southﬁeld Center in Darien is working on the evaluation and I’d like for him to attend the
PPT meeting. Dr. Heitzman is currently on vacation but 1 think he will be back in another week
and should be available in July so I’ll be trying to coordinate around that timing.” (B—9).

Sometime after this email exchange, Karen Mabee, CMS Assistant Principal, learned that the
Student was also enrolled at Eagle Hill for the fall of 2013. Eagle Hill had called GPS to
arrange for transportation sewices for the Student. (Testimony, Mabee)

On August 9, the Parents wrote to Shelly Somers, Principal of CMS, stating that the diagnostic
placement “is not an appropriate placement for [Student], would not allow him to make
meaningful educational progress, and places him at risk of regression.” Despite the Student’s
identiﬁcation as a child with Emotional Disturbance, the Parents stated that they had placed the
Student at Eagle School. “Eagle Hill offers a language-based, remedial program committed to
educating children with learning disabilities. The curriculum is individualized, interdisciplinaiy,
and transitional in nature. We will be seeking tuition reimbursement and related expenses from
Greenwich School Board.” (B-IO).

On August 16, the Mother emailed Dr. Frame repeating their position that the Parents had felt
that the proposed diagnostic placement was inappropriate and that the Student was being placed
at Eagle Hill because “GPS left us with no option but to enroll [Student] at EHS. The only way
to hold a place for [Student] was to enroll him.” (B—12)

On August 27, the Parents emailed GPS seeking to schedule a PPT meeting. A second PPT was
convened on September 17. In addition to the Mother, the PPT members included Dr.
McCarthy (school psychologist); Carolyn Hoette, (special education teacher); Dr. Jo Frame
(regular education teacher); Karen Mabee, (administrator); Julie Webster (speech and language
pathologist); Jeffrey Libby (Program Coordinator) and Dr. Rahtz, the Student’s psychiatrist.
The PPT team reviewed Dr. Heitzman’s report and offered to add additional diagnostic services
including a Board Ceitiﬁed Behavioral Analyst (“BCBA”) to assist during the diagnostic
placement period and other support sewices.

Student’s psychiatrist Dr. Rahtz opined that the only appropriate setting for Student should be a
private specialized school setting and that putting the Student in a mainstream school would be
“deleterious to [Student’s] self esteem and might have a negative impact on him emotionally
and psychologically.” Dr. Rahtz came to this opinion because he felt that the Student would not
be able to compete and do well in a setting with nondisabled peers. Dr. Rahtz testiﬁed that he
felt that the Student should be in private school even though he had no familiarity With GPS 01‘
CMS. He testiﬁed that his concern about placing the Student at CMS was that the Student
would see that other students were able to fulﬁll higher expectations that the Student could not
meet. (Testimony, Rahtz). Dr. Rahtz’s impression of the Student’s academic abilities compared
to peers is contradicted by the Student’s Summit May 24, 2014 IEP in which educators at
Summit repoit “superior” academic abilities and above grade level results compared to all
disabled and nondisabled peers on a district—wide basis. (B—3).

6

 

December 30, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14—0510

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

The Mother testiﬁed that she did not agree with the diagnostic placement offered by the Board
because she felt that it was a “trial and error approach to formulating a program as opposed to
one that took everything into account that we had presented at the PPT’K The mother thought
that she had provided enough information, including the access to the Student’s psychiatrist, and
the inclusion of a Summit School representative, for the Board to develop an lEP without a
diagnostic placement. (Testimony, Mother)

The Mother’s objection to the placement was due to Student’s educational placement in the
mainstream classroom. Compared to the mainstream school setting, at Summit, the “class size
was much smaller. . .. The day was structured from beginning until the time he left.” The
Student had sensory issues, including difﬁculty with loud noises, crowds, smells and tones of
voices. He had previously had a behavioral incident resulting from the smell of eggs. She felt
that the clinical and special education staff at Summit were trained to handle Student’s speciﬁc
types of meltdowns. She felt that the mainstream environment at CMS would be “sensory
challenging” for Student after she ﬁrst Visited CMS. In June 2013, the Mother took another
“quick tour” of CMS and observed “classes changing when the bell rang” and concluded that
“the bell is a sensory issue”. She did not tour the Student’s proposed classroom 01' the resource
room. The Mother testiﬁed, “I don’t think there would be an environment in the school that
would be appropriate for him.” She was “hopeful” that the PPT would offer a private placement
or a self—contained program, such as the Board’s Arch Street alternative placement program for
Greenwich High School. (Testimony, Mother)

The Mother testiﬁed that the Parents decided to place the Student at Eagle Hi11 School as a
result of the Board’s proposed diagnostic placement in August 2013. Eagle Hill is a state
approved non—public special education schools serving students with language based disabilities.
There was no evidence at the hearing that Eagle Hill’s clinical services were different ﬁ'om 01'
more appropriate than the services available through CMS clinical and special education staff.
(Testimony, McCarthy; Testimony, Hoette; B-3).

The Board successfully challenged the Mother’s credibility 0n the assertion that the Parents had
only decided to have the Student attend Eagle Hill as a result of the Board’s proposal of a
diagnostic placement. Indeed, the Parents had enrolled the Student at Eagle Hill School in
March 2013. On eross—examination, the Mother testiﬁed that she brought the Student to Eagle
Hill in February 2013 for an interview and signed a contract with and provided a nonrefundable
deposit of $6075.00 to Eagle Hill. As of June 1, 2013, the Parents had committed to pay Eagle
Hill the amount of a full year’s tuition, $60,750.00. The Parents contractually committed to pay
the amount of full tuition to Eagle Hill before the Mother registered the Student with GPS on
June 7, 2013. (Testimony, Mother; P—14)

The Mother’s demeanor and answers on cross-examination were not credible. For instance, the
Mother has a Master’s degree in Business Administration and works as a senior ﬁnancial
analyst in the ﬁnance industry in New York City. She testiﬁed that she did not pay attention to
her contractual obligations to Eagle Hill as of the date she registered the Student for Greenwich
Public Schools. Both she and her husband, a physician, signed the Eagle Hill contract and
provided a deposit at a time of family ﬁnancial crisis and income reduction. The Mother wrote
checks for installment payments to Eagle Hill School during the same period of time when she
met with CMS staff. At the same time, the Mother did not tell anyone at GPS that the Student
was already enrolled and that the Parents had agreed to pay a full year’s of tuition at Eagle Hill
as of the date of the Student’s registration. Further, the Mother’s non—committal response to the
school psychologist and specia1 education teacher’s request to obsewe the Student over the

7

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0510

28.

summer in order to prepare for Student’s arrival at school is not consistent with a parent who
was working to help her child succeed at CMS. A parent who is interested in a child’s success
would make an extra effort to introduce the child to new school staff. In fact, the Mother
demonstrated this effort by bringing the Student for a tour and interview at Eagle Hill in
Febmary of 2013. The Mother’s noncommittal response reveals that she had in fact had already
made the determination that Student would not need to meet GPS staff because Student would
not be attending CMS in the fall of 2013.

The Mother’s conduct raises troubling questions of whether the Parents had ever intended for
the Student to attend a Board school when Mother registered the Student, and what the Parents’
ultimate purpose is in ﬁling this Due Process Complaint seeking reimbursement for tuition and
education related expenses. (Testimony, Mother; P-14 and P-15).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

There is no dispute that Student became a student of the Board when Parent registered him at
the Board’s school on June 7, 2013 as a resident of the Town of Greenwich. This enrollment
occurred in the 2012-2013 School Year even though the Student completed the school year at
Summit School in New York, even though he never visited the Board’s school and even though
Parent stated on the enro11ment form that the Student would begin attending the Board’s school
in September of 2013. See Conn. Gen. Stat. 10—220.

There is no dispute that Student is eligible to receive a free and appropriate public education
(FAPE) and related services as set forth in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA), 20 U.S.C Sec 1401, et seq. and its implementing regulations codiﬁed at 34 CFR §300
et, Seq., and under Conn. Gen. Stat. Sec. 10—76.

The purpose of the IDEA is to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them
FAPE that emphasizes “special education and related services designed to meet their unique
needs” and “prepare them for further education, employment and independent living” and “to
ensure that the rights of children with disabilities and parents of such children are protected. . .”
20 U.S.C. §1400(d)(1). Congress did not intend the IDEA to guarantee a speciﬁc outcome, but
to provide a basic level of educational oppcntunity for students with disabilities. A school
district is not obligated to maximize the disabled student’s potential. Rowley, 458 US. at 192,
quoting S. Rep. No. 94—168, at 11. The IDEA only requires “the door of public education [to]
be opened for a disabled child in a ”meaningful' way." Walczak 142 F.3d at 130, citing Board of
Education offhe Hendrick Hudson Central School District v Rowley, 458 U S 176(1982).
However, it does not guarantee "everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents."
Id. at 132.

The Act deﬁnes FAPE as special education and related services which “(A) have been provided
at public expense, under public supervision and direction, and without charge; (B) meet the
standards of the State Educational Agency; (C) include an appropriate preschool, elementary, or
secondary school education in the State involved; and (D) are provided in conformity with the
individualized education program required under Sec. 614(d).” 20 U.S.C. §1401 (8).

The IDEA also mandates that ”[t]0 the maximum extent appropriate, children with disabilities
are educated with children who are not disabled, and special classes, separate schooling, or other
removal of children with disabilities from the regular educational environment occurs only

when the nature or severity of the disability of a child is such that education in regular classes

8

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0510

10.

with the use of supplementaiy aids and sewices cannot be achieved satisfactorily.” 20 U.S.C. §
1412(a)(5)(A); P. v. Newington Board ofEducarion, 546 F.3d 1 1 (2d Cir. 2008) citing Walczak.
supra 142 F.3d at 122.

In keeping with the IDEA’s preference for mainstreaming students with disabilities, IDEA’S
implementing regulations require school districts to offer a continuum of alternative placements
for students who require special education services. This continuum is a range of potential
placements in which a district can implement a student’s IEP. The preference order begins with
placing a student in a regular classroom as the least restrictive environment through a continuum
of more restrictive alternative placements such as special classes, special schools, home
instruction, and instruction in hospitals and institutions. 34 CFR §300.115(b); Letter to Cohen,
25 IDELR 516 (OSEP 1996)

IDEA’s implementing regulations, at 34 CFR§ 300.323 (f), outlines a receiving public agency’s
obligations to provide FAPE in the case of transfers from a public agency of another state.
“Under 34 CFR § 300.323 (1), if a child with a disability (who has an IEP in effect) transfers to a
public agency in a new State, and enrolls in a new school within the same schooI year, the new
public agency (in consultation with the parents) must provide the child with FAPE (including
sewices comparable to those described in the child's IEP from the previous public agency), until
the new public agency (1) conducts an evaluation pursuant to §§ 300.304 through 300.306 (if
determined to be necessary by the new public agency); and (2) develops and implements a new
IEP, if appropriate, that meets the applicable requirements in §§ 300.320 through 300.324.”
Questions and Answers on Individualized Education Programs (IEPs), Evaluations, and
Revaluations, Ofﬁce of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services 54 IDELR 297 (June 1,
2010).

The evaluation referenced in §300.323(f) is considered an “initial evaluation” for the new public
agency and for this new evaluation, “the implementing regulations at 34 CFR Part 300 do not
obligate a school district receiving a special education student from another State to accept the
evaluation results, eligibility determinations, and 1EP decisions made in another State.” Letter to
Sims, 103 LRP 22737 (OSEP 10/9/02). School systems may insist on evaluation by qualiﬁed
professionals who are satisfactory to school ofﬁcials. Dubois v. Connecticut State Board 01
Education et al., 727 F.2d 44, 48 (2d Cir. 1984) quoting Vander Malle v. Ambach, 673 F.2d 49,
53 (2d Cir. 1982.)

In evaluating a child with a suspected disability under IDEA regulations, an IEP team must give
“ﬁrst consideration” to placement of a disabled student in the regular classroom with
appropriate aids and services before more restrictive placements can be considered. Letter to
Cohen, supra. Consideration of more restrictive environments such as special classes or special
schools should only be made after a school district has made reasonable efforts to accommodate
a child in a regular classroom with supplementary aids and sewices. See Oberti v. Board of
Education of the Borough of Clemenion School District et al, 995 F.2d 1204 (3d Cir. 1993).
GPS complied with its IDEA obligations to give ﬁrst consideration to placement in a regular
CMS classroom. See Findings ofFact Nos, 12,13,14 and 15.

A diagnostic placement is a method of evaluation, not an educational placement. See M
Hartford Board ofEducation. OCR 01-86-1016, 352 IDELR 300 (1986). RCSA 10—76d—4
provides that a board of education may use trial placement for diagnostic purposes as part of the
initial evaluation of a child. The diagnostic placement is a structured program, of not more than
forty school days duration, the purpose of which is to assess the needs of a child who is 01‘ may

9

December 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0510

11‘

be a child with a disability, but for whom the evaluation or reevaluation is either inconclusive or
data insufﬁcient to determine the child’s eligibility for special education and or develop or
revise the child’s individualized education program. The planning and placement team meets at
least once every ten days with personnel working with the child to review progress and revise
services where necessary. RCSA 10—76d-14 provides that trial placement shall be terminated as
soon as a child’s needs have been determined and that the PPT reconvene to determine the
child’s eligibility for special education and related services, as appropriate, 01' to review, revise
or develop the child’s IEP based on ﬁndings made during the diagnostic placement as well as
other evaluative information regarding the child. The information provided to GPS from
Summit did not contain sufﬁcient information for GPS to develop an IEP for Student in a
mainstream setting. GPS’s diagnostic placement plan complied with the requirements of state
regulations. See F indings of F act Nos. 12, 13, 14, 15 and 2].

A receiving public agency must provide FAPE during the period of an initial evaluation. FAPE
is provided by offering services comparable to those sewices provided in the Student’s previous
IEP until the receiving public agency’s IEP team has completed this initial evaluation. “
‘Comparable sewices’ means services that are ‘similar’ or ‘equivalent’ to those that were
described in the child’s IEP from the previous public agency as determined by the child’s
newly—designated IEP in the new public agency.” See Comment 71 Fed. Reg. 4668] (2006).
GPS did provide FAPE as deﬁned by 34 CFR §323(f) by matching services to those contained
in Student’s previous Summit School IEP during the period of the diagnostic placement. See
Findings afFacts 13, 14, 15 and 21,

FINAL DECISION AN D ORDER:

1‘ The Board decision to perform diagnostic placement at CMS Was appropriate.

2. The Board did not have sufﬁcient information to develop an IEP and program for
Student in the mainstream setting.

3. Since the Board provided the Student with FAPE, there is no need to address the issues
related to placement or reimbursement of tuition and related expenses at Eagle Hill
School.

10

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after'
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Mm

 

 

HearingOfﬁcer Signature
Svlvia H0 .
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

