October 9, 2013 , Final Decision and Order 14—0121

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Fairﬁeld Board 01" Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney Lawrence Berliner
Law Ofﬁce of Lawrence Berliner, LLC
1720 Post Road East, Suit 214E
Westpoxt, CT 06880

Appearing on behalfof the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Brette 1-1. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board err when it found that Student’s conduct was not a manifestation of his disability?
2. Was the Interim Alternative Educational Setting (hereinaﬁer, “IAES”)1 provided to Student upon
removal inappropriate?

3. Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the period oftime Student has been

placed in the Interim Alternative Educational Placement?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

On August 14, 2013, the Fairﬁeld Board ot‘Edueation received a Request for an Expedited Special
Education Due Process Hearing. The undersigned hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on August 20, 2013. A
prehearing telephone conference was held on Wednesday August 28, 2013. Pursuant to 34 CFR §
300.532 (c)(2), the hearing was required to occur within 20 school days of the ﬁling of the complaint
and the decision was to be mailed within 10 school days after the hearing. Per the academic calendar 01'
the Fairﬁeld Public School System, the ﬁrst school day took place on August 29, 2013. Utilizing the
August 29, 2013 start date and not counting scheduled school holidays, the 20th school day fell on
September 27, 2013. When the hearing concluded on September 25, 2013, the deadline for mailing the
decision was 10 school days thereafter, October 9, 2013. The hearing convened on September 12, 2013,
September 17, 2013, September 19, 2013 and September 25, 2013.

The Board’s witnesses were Director of Pupil Services Andrea Leonardi (hereinafter “Director”), Halley
Ceglia (11ereinaﬁer“Social Worker”), Special Education Teacher/Case Manager Dawn Jara (hereinafter

1 The original statement of issues referred to an Interim Allemative Educational Placement. The correct term is Interim
Alternative Educational Setting, and that tenn is utilized in this decision.

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0121

“Case Manager”), Detective Beth Irizarry, Mr. Paul Zhitomi, (hereinafter “Regular Education Teacher”,
and Mr. James Coyne, (hereinafter “Headmaster”).

The Parent’s witnesses were Parent, Doctor Paul Krubiner (hereinafter “Parent Psychologist"), and IT
Professional, Lee Solt.

The Parent submitted exhibits numbered P-1 to P—19. Objections were made to P—10, P-ll (in part), P—
13, P— 14 and P—15 on the basis of relevancy. The relevancy objections were overruled in an order issued
by the hearing ofﬁcer on September 16, 2013, in which she found that the objections made would go to
the weight of the evidence not the admissibility. The right to make objections on other grounds was
presewed for the time of introduction. Objections to portions of P—1 1 that could not be properly
authenticated were sustained. All other exhibits were entered as full exhibits.

The Board submitted exhibits numbered B~1 t0 B~73. Objections to B—l through B-38, 13—41 and 13—43
through B-47 were overruled and were entered as 11111 exhibits.

Parent’s Request for an Expedited Special Education Due Process Hearing was entered as a full exhibit
as Exhibit HO—I.

A11 motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

T o the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of
law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. For reference, see SAS Institute Inc. v H. Computer
Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Am F. v. Ca1a11en Independent School
District, 835 F.Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993)‘

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10-76h
and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in accordance with
the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.At), C.G.S. §§4—176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4—181a
and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

Aﬁer considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, 1 ﬁnd the following facts:

1. Student is presently in the 1 11h grade and is eligible for special education under the category of
Autism (Testimony ofParent, Testimony oi‘Social Worker, 13-56). Student’s primary eligibility was
changed from LD to Autism after his 8th grade triennial. (Testimony of Parent). Student’s disability
places him 011 the high—ﬁmctioning end of the autism spectrum, in what formerly would be categorized
as Asperger Syndrome. (Testimony of Social Worker),

2. Student’s present levels ofacademic achievement and functional performance described in May 6,
2013 Individualized Education Program (hereinafter “IEP”) are similar to those presented in Student’s
May 7, 2012 IEP. (B-49, B-56).

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—012]

Description of Student’s Disability

3. Student has weaknesses in language ants in the area of writing. (B-56). Student’s weaknesses
impacted his ability to clearly express his understanding of content area concepts and text without
specialized instruction and accommodations. (B—56)i

4, Student has weaknesses in the area of organization which impact his ability to efﬁciently access the
general curriculum without specialized instruction and accommodations. (B-56). Despite these
organizational challenges, Student is usually able to ﬁnd required items and is prepared for class (B—56),

5‘ Student has weaknesses in the behavioral and social spheres in that he has difﬁculty maintaining
social interaction with others, especially during unstructured time and when an activity or subject does
not interest himt (Testimony of Parent, Testimony of Social Worker, B-56). Student has difﬁculty
initiating conversations with peers and maintaining interactions with them. (Testimony of School Social
Worker, B-56),

6. Student has a delayed social and emotional understanding of himself and relationships in general.
(Testimony of School Social Worker) Developmentally the Student presents in a social and emotional
framework as 10 years old rather than his actual chronological age. (Testimony ot‘Pal'ent Psychologist),

7. While Student has weaknesses in the behavioral and social spheres, he has expressed contentment
with his social life. (13—56). Student prefers to spend time alone focusing on his interests. (Testimony of
Social Worker, Testimony ofCase Manager, B-56). Student had social difﬁculties with other students in
Biology in the 2012—2013 school year; students picked on him when he mispronounced the teacher’s
name 01' talked about things that weren’t relevant to the topic at hand. (B—52).

8. Communication weaknesses for Student include pragmatic language deﬁciencies and difﬁculty
initiating conversations with peer and maintaining interactions with them. (B-42, B—56) The ability to
understand ambiguous language is a challenge area. (B-56) Student is very concrete and literal in his
thinking. (Testimony of Case Manager, Parent Psychologist).

9. Intelligence and Achievement Testing show that the Student has average to low average intelligence.
(Testimony of Parent’s Psychologist, B—lS, E39)

10‘ Student’s processing ability in general is slow, although the speed varies depending on the type of
task he is doing. (Testimony of Parent and Parent Psychologist, B—39). Rapid picture naming and visual
matching are in the very low range. (Testimony of Parent Psychologist; 13—39). The more complex a
visual task the more difﬁcult it will be for Student and the longer it will take him to complete the task.
Tasks involving copying, writing and Visual matching are more difﬁcult for him. (Testimony of Parent
Psychologist).

11. Student, ifprovided with sufﬁcient time is able to produce work with same accuracy as non—
disabled peers working at an average level. (Testimony ofParent Psychologist).

12‘ Student’s reading levels were commensurate with his peers. (Testimony of Case Manager).

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

13. Student shares characteristics of other students with Aspergers in that, if he there is information he
really likes, he is very fast to retrieve and receive and express that information. (Testimony of Social
Worker).

14. Student can appear disinterested when engaging peers and lacks follow through with social plans,
engagement and school involvement. (Testimony of Parent Psychologist).

15. A Planning and Placement Team meeting (l1ereinaftei"‘PPT”) was held on May 6, 2013 to plan the
triennial evaluation, conduct an annual review and address transition planning. The PPT
recommendations for services in the IEP were 2.1 hours per week oi‘special education services 3 times
in the learning center, .7 hours per week ofspeech and language and .7 hours per week 01‘ social work.
(B-56).

16. At the May 6, 2013 PPT Meeting, the team reviewed student’s current progress, reviewed and
revised present levels of performance, reviewed goals and objectives and new goals and objectives were
presented and accepted. (Testimony ofCase Manager, B—56). A change in services was recommended
for Student’s junior year, in that Student’s services were going to be provided in the context of the
learning center rather than through a co—taught class. (Testimony ofCase Manager). The change in
setting was agreed to in order to allow Student to participate in honors level classes. (Id.)

17. At the annual review On May 6, 2013, the team discussed what evaluations and tests should be
conducted as part ol‘Student’s Triennial evaluations. (8—57). Areas to be assessed included dysgraphia,
cognitive, achievement, social skills and adaptive academics and pragmatic and written expression and
expressive language. (8—57). Parent gave written consent for the evaluations on May 6, 2013. (1d,)

18. At the time of May 6, 2013 PPT, the only conﬁrmed computer misuse by Student was behavior
which Student had admitted, and had received after school detentions. (Testimony of Case Manager)

19. Student acknowledged receipt of the Student Handbook in writing. (B60). The Student handbook
includes the District Network Guidelines, which describes a computer code of conduct for students. (B~
51). The Guidelines contain “I” statements such as “I will not damage computers, alter systems or
networks.” (B-5 1 ).

20. Student has the ability to differentiate between right and wrong. (Testimony ofParent Psychologist
and Social Worker). Student demonstrated that he is able to follow the miles and meet expectations
outlined for him. (Testimony of Case Manager and Social Worker).

21. Student had no disciplinary issues in 9th grade. (Testimony of Parent).

22. Student was given a week’s worth of detention beginning on March 25, 2013 for remotely shutting
down another student’s computer twice. (Testimony of Parent; 13-53). Parent was unaware of the
detention until April 10, 2013 when she had a conversation with the Dean who informed Parent of the
detention by phone. (Testimony ofParent).The Dean indicated in this April 10, 2013 phone call that he
had spoken to Student about the detention and not engaging in the behavior again. (Testimony of
Parent). After Parent and Dean spoke by phone, the Dean followed up with an email listing “possible list
ofmischief behavior” which he indicated he would continue to investigate and requested mom ﬁnd out

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0121

about from Student. (Testimony of Parent, B—60). When Parent reviewed the list with Student, he
admitted only to changing the background color on one computer. (Testimony of Parent).

23. A meeting was held on April 26, 2013 with Parent and Dean and Case Manager to discuss Student
getting his nctbook computer back and files that had been found in Student’s H drive, where Fairfieid
Warde students save their work. (Testimony of Parent).

24. On May 30th, Student’s Netbook and mouse were conﬁscated by Student’s English teacher and
Student’s H drive was shut down. (Testimony of Parent).

25. Student was able to successfully work with peers when asked, but was not the type of student to
actively try to start conversations 01' make friends. (Testimony ofCase Manager).

26. Student has demonstrated the abi1ity to follow the rules in context oi‘weekly social skills group.
(Testimony of Social Worker). Genera] miles for computer usage discussed in same group with a
discussion about house computer use was for school work related behavior (1d.) In the context oi‘a
social skills group session discussing bullying, Student related that he had not been bullied and that he
did not feel uncomfortable. (1d.)

27. Student was encouraged to discuss problems related to computer issues with school psychologist
and school social worker. (Testimony of Social worker).

28. Student is able to understand that hacking is illegal. (Testimony of Social Worker).

29. Student spends a lot 0fti1ne on the computer and playing Video games which he can play online
with other people. (Testimony oi‘Parent Psychologist, Testimony ot‘Schoo] Social Worker). While
Parent indicated that Student does not socialize outside of school. (Testimony of Parent), Student does
engage in social activities online. (Testimony ofParent Psychologist). Student expressed an interest in
hacking and researched hacking on the internet. (Testimony oi‘Parent Psychologist).

30. Student admitted to remotely shutting down computers and changing screen on his English teacher’s
computer, but denied any other actions. (Testimony ofParent Psychologist).

31. As ofthe date ofthe suspension, Student had a cumulative GPA 013.0532. (B~65).

32. For the 2012—2013, school year, the majority of Students time in school was spent in general
education curriculum. (B-59).

33. Student’s transcript for 9th grade 201 1—2012 school year shows that the Student earned 4 As 2 B+s
1 B 2 B- 2 Cs and a Pass. Student’s transcript for 10th grade demonstrated improvement over the 201 1-
2012 year. (13—65).

34. During the hearing Parent characterized Student’s two computer courses in 10th grade as “slightly
unstmetui‘ed”, which Parent deﬁned as classes in which a Student is given a free opportunity to work on
assignments and there is a little bit more verbal interaction. (Testimony ofParent). Parent contrasted the
computer classes with math and science which Parent believed to be more task—oriented with worksheets
and direct instruction. (Testimony of Parent).

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0121

35. Student excelled in his Computer Games D and P receiving a ﬁnal grade of A+ (B—63, and P—l9)
and a ﬁnal grade of B in his CAD Computer class. (P—l9) Student received a C in Geometry and B— in
Biology. (P-19).

36. Student sought and was given permission to take an AP computer course in his Junior year.
(Testimony of Regular Education Teacher).

37. Student presents as a child who is not vulnerable to pressure to do anything outside his very narrow
areas of interest. (Testimony of Director).

38. Subsequent to a reprimand from the Dean, Student’s computer teacher had a conversation with
Student about the conduct on the computers which teacher characterized as being “naughty”. Student
acknowledged being “naughty” and said the behavior wouldn’t happen again. (Testimony of Regular
Education Teacher).

39. On April 10, the dean sent an email to Parent with a possible list of mischief behavior including:
deleting a ‘32 bit system in a school computer lab, installing an administrative profile in the command
prompt so that student can remotely shut English teacher’s computer, resetting mac computers in the
library mac lab, overloading the project drive by ﬁlling it up with games that have large memory - asked
mom to let him know what she found out and continue to investigate from his end. (B—60).

40. On May 27, 2013, an email was sent by Parent to Case Manager P—16. Pursuant to this request an
informal meeting was scheduled for June 7, 2013. (Testimony of Case Manager). This meeting did not
take place due to Student’s suspension on June 3, 2013. (Testimony of Case Manager). In lieu of an
informal meeting, the MD PPT was held on June 12, 2013. (Testimony of Case Manager).

41. The suspension report dated June 3, 2013, indicated that Student admits to some activity on the
network but denied causing the network to crash. Student was found in possession of ﬂash drives with
computer “hacking” tools installed. Some ofthese tools were also found on his H drive. (B—64).
Preventative measures taken were after school detentions and conferences with dean and teachers. (B—
64).

42. Suspension report dated June 3, 2013 from Housemaster t0 Superintendent 10 day suspension
reason for suspension — violation of acceptable use policy causing major disruption to school computer
network. (B-64).

43. On June 4, 2013, Student was suspended. (B64).

44. On June 7, 201 , the Superintendent sent a letter to Parents, in which he informed Parents that
depending on the outcome of the MD PPT scheduled for June 12, 2013 at 8:30 am. an expulsion
hearing would be held at 12:30 pm. on that same day. The allegations contained in the letter were that
during a period oftime including but not limited to March 20, 2013 through June 3, 2013 Student
engaged in various acts of misconduct in violation of the Code of Conduct ot‘the Fairﬁeld Public
schools, including unauthorized use of the school system’s computer network, unauthorized access into
the school system’s computer network, destruction and manipulation of teacher and student electronic
ﬁles, and unauthorized interference with the operation of school computers, electronic devices, and
network administration systems. The Board further alleged that Student’s misconduct caused serious

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14~0121

disruption f the educational process throughout Fairﬁeld Warde High School and the Fairﬁeld Public
Schools. (B-67).

45. On June 6, 2013, the District sent out a notice inviting parents and school based PPT members to a
PPT meeting which was scheduled to take place at 8:30 am. on J une 12, 2013. (B—66) The notice
identiﬁed the purpose of the meeting was to determine whether or not the student’s alleged misconduct
was a manifestation of his disability. (B—66),

46. On June 12, 2013, the manifestation determination PPT meeting was held at Student’s high school.
(Testimony of Parent). In attendance were Student, Parents, Mother’s Boyfriend, Family Member acting
as Family Attorney, Student’s Special Education Teacher/Case Manager, School Social Worker,
Director ot‘Pupil Services, Board Attorney, Dean, Student’s Regular Education Teacher, Special
Education Coordinator and Fairﬁeld Warde High Schoo1 Housemaster. (B-70). Two invitees, the school
psychologist and the school speech and language professional were not in attendance (Testimony of
Parent).

47. The MD PPT discussed the misconduct in question, which was presented by team members,
including the Dean of Students who was present at the meeting. (Testimony of Case Manager,
Testimony of Director). Student’s disciplinary history was reviewed and attendance records were
reviewed. (Testimony of Case Manager and Director). The aimual review which had been conducted in
March, grades, results of assessments, nature of Student’s disability and how it could potentially relate
to his conduct, Student’s current IEP and reports of teachers were reviewed. The Student’s special
education ﬁle was present in the meeting room and the meeting lasted approximately 2 hours
(Testimony of Case Manager, Testimony of Director).

48. The behavioral/diagnostie characteristics of the student that were the subject oi‘the review at the
MD PPT were: difﬁculty developing and maintaining relationships, articulating and expanding on ideas
via oral or written communication, comprehension of ambiguous language, pragmatic language,
perspective taking skills, paying attention to details given an assignment or directions, self-advocaey and
articulation of speciﬁc needs. (B—70).

49. At the meeting, members ot‘Student’s family expressed their opinions. (Testimony of Parent).
Family members expressed the belief that Student has not committed the alleged misconduct that was
the subject ofthe disciplinary matter. (Testimony of Parent, Testimony of Director). Family members
raised issues of whether or not the accommodation ot‘preferential seating had been implemented and
whether or not classes were structured. (Testimony of Parent). Family members raised the possibility
that Student engaged in this behavior to get attention from peers. The School Based Team members
understood and considered family’s contentions, but rejected them when coming to the ultimate
conclusion that Student’s conduct was not a manifestation of his autism. (B—69)

50. At MD meeting School Based Team members discussed behavior of Student taking down the
network, shutting down computers, having ﬂash drives which were conﬁscated and network crashes 0r
shutdowns. (Testimony of Case Manager, Testimony of Parent, Testimony of School Psychologist)

51‘ During MD PPT meeting Parents raised the issue ofwhether or not the IEP was being implemented,
speciﬁcally questioning whether 01' not preferential seating was implemented, (B-69)i Team determined

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

that preferential seating was utilized, but that the accommodation of preferential seating would not have
prevented the misconduct. (B—69).

52. Family members also questioned whether or not positive reinforcement had been implemented at
the MD PPT. (Testimony of Case Manager). Accommodation of positive reinforcement and preferential
seating were implemented in Student’s co-taught English class. (Testimony of Case Manager).

53. The School Based Team members present at the MD PPT meeting determined that the conduct in
question was not a manifestation of Student’s disability. (Testimony of Parent, Testimony of Director,
B—69, 8—70). The family members, including family member acting as family’s attorney disagreed with
the School Based Team’s ﬁndings. (Testimony of Parent, Testimony of Director, B-69)l

54. As of the last date of hearing in this matter the expulsion hearing had not yet concluded and the
Student had yet to be expelled. (Board’s Brief).

55. Parent received an email of IEP document from MD PPT meeting on either July 1 1, 2013 or July
12, 2013. (Testimony of Parent).

56‘ At the June 12, 2013 MD PPT meeting, the potential need for an Interim Alternative Educational
Setting was discussed and the school based team members identiﬁed Cooperative Educational Services-
Therapeutic Day Program (hereinafter “CES—TDP”) as an appropriate IAES, should the Student be
expelled. (Testimony ofDirector, Social Worker, Case Manager; E70)

57. Parents did not agree that CES-TDP was an appropriate placement for Student for any length of
time, believing that remaining at Fairfield Warde High School was the appropriate placement.
(Testimony of Parent, Testimony of Director, B—69).

58. Student attended a program at CES from Kindergalten through lst grade. (Testimony of Parent).
Parent’s current concerns are based on her child’s experience with that K-l program, during which she
observed that her son’s behavior deteriorated and staff were not receptive to input from parents or
outside professionals. (Testimony ot‘Parent).

59, Sttucture at CES—TDP is different from when Student previously attended in Kindergarten and First
grade and the high school setting is distinct from the elementary school setting. (Testimony of Social
Worker).

60. The CES—TDP would not provide Student with interaction with non-disabled peers. (B-69)t There
are two CES—TDPS offered for high school students, Student would be placed in the program for
Students who internalize rather than externalize their behavior. (Testimony of Director).

6]. There was discussion at MD PPT meeting about concern about student being in a program at home
alone leading to social isolation and the impact on his mental health. (Testimony ot‘School Social
Worker and Director).

62. Placement at CES—TDP would provide student with 6 hours of daily instruction with a therapeutic
component with access to related services through speech and language pathologists, social workers and
school psychologists. (Testimony of Director, Testimony of Social Worker, B—69)t The alignment

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

between curriculum at CES-TDP and Fairﬁeld Warde will facilitate Student’s transition back into his
original placement. (Testimony ofDirector) The CES-TDP’s close proximity to Fairﬁeld Warde will
facilitate contact between Student’s teachers and service providers in both locations and aid in planning
for the transition back into a regular education setting. (Testimony of Director).

63. Per the June 12, 2013, the PPT is scheduled to review child’s IEP placing child at CES—TDP 30
days after the child was enrolled. (B—69).

64. As Student has yet to be expelled, Student has never attended the CES—TDP and has instead been
receiving homebound services. (Testimony of Parent, Testimony ol‘Social Worker, Testimony of
Director).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:
Manifestation Determinations

l. The removal of a special education student from his placement for more than 10 consecutive school
days constitutes a change of placement. 34 CPR § 300.536(a)(1)1

2. In instances when a school district determines it is necessary to change the placement ofa special
education student because of a violation of a code 01‘ student conduct, the student is afforded certain
procedural protections. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(k)(1)(E); 34 CPR. § 300530-533.

3. A school district must notify parents of a PPT meeting, including a manifestation determination PPT
meeting, early enough to ensure that they will have an opportunity to attend, and must schedule the
meeting at a mutually agreed upon time and place. 34 C.F.R. § 300.322(a)(1) and (2). 1n the case 01‘ a
manifestation determination PPT meeting, the notice must inform the parent of the decision to change
the student's placement and must be accompanied by a copy of the parent's procedural safeguards. 20
U.S.C. § 1415(k)(l)(H).

4. A manifestation determination must be made by the district, the parent, and relevant members 01‘ the
IEP team as determined by the parent and the district. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(k)(1)(E)(i); 34 C.F.R. §
300.530(e)(1).

5. The manifestation determination results from an analysis of the child's behavior as demonstrated in
different environments and over time. All relevant information in the student‘s ﬁle, including the 1131’,
any observations of teachers, and any relevant information from the parents must be reviewed to
determine if the conduct was caused by, 01‘ had a direct and substantial relationship to the student's
disability, 01‘ was the direct result of the district's failure to implement the student’s IEP. 34 CPR. §
300.530(e).

6. Incidences where a Student has exercised bad judgment have been determined to be unrelated to the
child‘s disability. Fitzgerald v. Fairfax County Sch. Bd, 50 IDELR 165 (ED. Va. 2008) Lancaster
Elementary Sch. Dist., 49 IDELR 53 (SEA CA 2007).

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

7. The district cannot provide its own interpretation of the child's actions -— it must provide the MD
team with information about the child's actual conduct. See South Lyon Community Schs. , 50 IDELR
237 (SEA M1 2008)

8. “...When a child's misbehavior does not result from his handicapping condition, there is simply no
justification for exempting him from the rules, including those regarding expulsion, applicable to other
children To do othelwise would amount to assetting that all acts of a handicapped child, both good
and bad, are fairly attributable to his handicap. We know that not to be so.” (Doe v. Maker (9th Cir,
1986 793 F.2d 1470, 1480, fn 8, aﬂ’d, sub nom, Honig v, Doe (1988) 484 U.S. 305).

Discipline of Special Education Students

9. If the PPT team decides that the student's conduct was caused by, 01' had a direct and substantial
relationship to the child‘s disability, then the conduct must be determined to be a manifestation of the
child's disability, and the child must continue to receive education sewices that allow the child to
progress toward the goals set fotth in the 1131’. 20 U.S.C. § l415(k)(1)(E); 34 CPR § 300.530(c) and
(e)(2). Ifthe IEP team determines the conduct is not a manifestation of the student's disability, then
normal school disciplinaiy procedures may be used to address the incident in the same way as they
would be applied to non-disabled students. 20 U.S.C. § l415(k)(1)(C); 34 C.F.R. § 300.530(c).

Appeal of Manifestation Determinations

10. A parent who disagrees with any decision regarding placement or the manifestation determination
may request a hearing. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(k)(3)(A); 34 CPR. §300.532(a).

l 1. Pursuant to the authority granted under 20 U18.C. § l415(k)(3)(B)(ii), a hearing officer may return a
child with a disability to the placement from which the child was removed; or order a change in
placement for a child with a disability. 34 C.F.R. § 300.532(b)(1) and (2)

12. A hearing requested challenging a manifestation determination or a placement decision under 34
C.F.R. § 300.530 01‘ 34 CPR § 300.532 is conducted on an expedited basis and must occur within 20
school days of the date the hearing request is ﬁled. 34 C.F.R. § 300.532(c)(2). A decision must be
rendered within 10 school days of the conclusion of the hearing. Id.

N0 Authority for Factual Findings Contrary to Board

13. As evidenced by the testimony and documents provided by Parent, Parent does not believe that
Student committed the conduct in question and on that basis is seeking a ﬁnding that the Board’s
decision to expel the student was incorrect. The merits ofBoard’s decision to expel the student are
currently being challenged by Parent in the context of an expulsion hearing. Board’s Brief. Arguments
as to the merits of the Board’s factual ﬁndings of misconduct are properly brought in the forum of an
expulsion hearing, and not a special education due process hearing.

2 To permit concurrent hearings on whether or not student committed misconduct results in both panics
incurring the costs of ﬁghting about the same issue on two fronts. The potential clearly exists for the
expulsion hearing ofﬁcer and the special education hearing ofﬁcer to reach different conclusions as to
the merits ol‘the board’s ﬁndings regarding the student’s conduct. Should the decisions conﬂict, the

10

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0121

14. No legal authority could be found for the proposition that a manifestation determination PPT must
evaluate the merits 01' the district’s ﬁndings as to whether 01‘ how the student’s conduct occurred. A
similar request to invalidate a manifestation determination 011 the basis that the conduct in question did
not actually occur was addressed in Danny K. v. Department afEduca/ion, State afHawaii 57 IDELR
185; 11 1 LRP 69834. In that case, the U .8. District Coult held that to require MD PPTS to engage in
such analysis:
“... would essentiaily deputize manifestation determination teams, and in turn, administrative
hearings ofﬁcers and federal courts, as appellate deans of students. This would be inconsistent
with Congress's intent in streamlining the IDEA in 2004. See H. Rep. No. 108—77, at 143-45
("One of the explicit goals of the discipline improvements within the bill is to ensure classroom
safety. The Committee often hears from classroom teachers and school principals that Federal
law ties their hands in responding quickly and effectively to very serious student behavior
problems and effective management of their classrooms." Id.

15. The Office ot‘Special Education has stated that “The IDEA and its in1ple111enting regulations neither
preclude 1101‘ require that a hearing ofﬁcer determine whether a certain action by a student with a
disability amounts to a violation of the school district‘s Student Code of Conduct.” Letter to Ramirez, 60
IDELR 230 (OSEP 12/5/12)

16. OSEP Memorandum No. 13-08 Question E-2 describes the authority of hearing officers in
expedited hearings as follows: “An impartial hearing ofﬁcer conducting an expedited due process
hearing under 34 CFR §300.51 1 hears, and makes a determination regarding, the due process complaint.
Under 34 CFR §300.532(b)(2), a hearing ofﬁcer also has the authority to determine whether the child’s
removal from his 01‘ her placement violated 34 CFR §300.530 (authority 01‘school personnel); whether a
child’s behavior was a manifestation of his 01‘ her disability; and whether maintaining the child’s current
placement is substantially likely to result in injury to the child 01‘ to others.” None of the regulations
cited in this section 01" the Memorandum contain language permitting the hearing ofﬁcer to
independently evaluate the claims of misconduct. 34 CFR §300.51 1 confers general authority on the
hearing officer to conduct special education hearings. 34 CFR§ 300.530 (21) provides school personnel
with the authority “...to consider any unique circumstances 011 a case-by-case basis when determining
whether a change in placement, consistent with the other requirements of this section, is appropriate for
a child with a disability who violates a code of student conduct". Thus, this ensures that a cookie-cutter
approach is not applied to change 111 placement decisions. When read 111 the context 01‘ the rest 01‘secti0n
34 CFR §3001530, in which the permissible actions of school personnel when they are determining
whether or not to discipline children with disabilities are clearly delineated, no mention is made of the
autho11ty to ovemun the factual ﬁndings of the body p1oposing disciplinary action and 34 CFR

§300. 530 (a) cannot be 1ead to confer authority 011 the MD PPT (01‘ by extension, the hearing o1ﬁce1‘) to
reach the 1ne1its of the 1esults ot Boar’d s investigation.

17. The argument that 34 C.F.R. §530(c), rather than setting out requirements for expedited hearings for
a limited set of issues, permits parents to request expedited hearings on any issue, provided the hearing
conforms to 34 C.F.R. (3507, 34 C.F.R. §508 (a)th1‘ough (c) 34 C.F.R. §532, and 34 C.F.R. §§510 to
514 is contrary to the plain language Ofthe regulations. 34 C.F.R. §532 (a) states in relevant part “The

 

spectre is raised of two separate court appeals arising out of the same factual dispute with all the
associated fees and costs, both pecuniary and intangible.

11

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

parent of a child with a disability who disagrees with any decision regarding placement under §§300.530
and §§300.531 or the manifestation determination under 300.530 (6) ...may appeal the decision by
requesting a hearing.”

18. Subsection (1) of 34 C.F.R. §532 (c) titled “Expedited due process hearings” provides that due
process hearings are available on an expedited basis for hearings requested under 34 C.F.R. §532 (a).
As 34 C.F.R. §532 (a) provides only four regulatory bases for the application of the expedited timeline,
a claim that expedited hearings are available for (my issue cannot stand.

Constitution of PPT Team

19. Parents claim that the PPT was not properly constituted, because the school psychologist and school
speech and language professional were invited to the MD PPT but were not in attendance when the
meeting occurred. The MD is to be conducted by the LEA, parent, and relevant members of the child’s
IEP team (as determined by the parent and the LEA. 34 C.F.R. §530 (e) (1) The term “complete team”
is not found in the regulation and it is not for the parents to deﬁne what constitutes a complete team. See
Fitzgerald v. Failjﬂu' Cozmly Sch. 3d,, 50 IDELR 165 (ED. Va. 2008) in which plaintiffs claimed an
equal right to determine the composition of the MDR PPT. The court in that case found that when read
in context of IDEA’s statutOIy scheme as a whole, 1415 (k) (1 )(e)(i) does not require parental consent or
unanimous agreement to PPT members, rather the “language means that the LEA determines the school
system’s MDR members and the parents may determine whom they wish to invite in addition to those
designated by the school and the LEA”. Id.

20. The MD PPT is a subset ot‘PPT. The PPT is to be comprised ot‘the following categories:
1. child’s parents;
2. at least one of the child’s regular education teachers;
3. at least one of the child’s special education teachers;
4. a representative of the LEA who is qualiﬁed to either provide or supervise special education
instruction and who is knowledgeable about the schools general education curriculum and other
available resources;
5, someone who can interpret the instmctional implications of evaluation results, but who
otherwise may be one of the aforementioned individuals;
6. any other individuals who have knowledge or special expeitise who may attend at the
discretion of the parent or the LEA and the child when appropriate; and
7. the child, when appropriate 20 U.S.C 1414(d)(1)(B)

The PPT was properly constituted with members of each ot‘these categories.

Consideration of Special Factors

21. Parent alleges that the Consideration of Special Factors were present based on the checking of the
box on page 10 ofthe June 12, 2013 IEP, a copy of which was received by Parent in July 2013. No
evidence was presented that any family members or PPT members discussed any of the Consideration of
Special Factors listed on Page 10 of the IEP, either in substance or to determine whether 01‘ not the box
indicating that IEP Goals and Objectives have been developed to address the behavior on the IEP should
be checked. District staff averred credibly that this box was checked in error, in effect a typographical
en'or.

12

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

Interim Alternative Educational Setting

22. The student's IEP team determines the student's interim alternative educational setting (hereinafter
“1AES”). 34 CFR §300.53 ]. What constitutes an appropriate IAES will depend on the circumstances of
each individual case. 71 Fed. Reg. 46,722 (2006) Although CES-TDP was selected by the MD PPT as
the appropriate IAES, that placement has yet to actually occur. The CES—TDP is in effect a contingency
placement should the student be expelled. Currently the Student is receiving homebound services.

23. While the IDEA does not specify the alternative setting in which educational services must be
provided, the alternative educational setting must be selected "so as to enable the child to continue to
participate in the general education curriculum, although in another setting, and to progress toward
meeting the goals set out in the child's IEP.” 34 CFR §300.530 (d)(1).

24. The appropriateness of home instruction as an IAES must be evaluated on a ease-by-case basis. 11‘
there is no alternative school 01' other similar public facility in the district, the IDEA does not appear to
require a district to place a student in a private school or facility for the duration 01" an IAES, assuming
placement at home meets the criteria for an appropriate IAES. In order to comply with the modiﬁed
FAPE requirement, it also should include consideration of the child's needs and educational goals. 64
Fed. Reg. 12,624 (1999).

Compensatmy Education

25. Compensatoty Education is an equitable remedy recognized by the courts to address past
deprivations. Pihl v. Massachusetts Dept. Qf'Eduu, 20 IDELR 668 (1st Cir. 1993); Letter to Kohn, l7
LDELR 522 (OSERS 1991). See a1so,Letter/o Riffel,34 IDELR 292 (OSERS 2000).

Summary Findings

26. Based on Legal Conclusions 13, 14, 15 and 16, this Hearing Ofﬁcer does not have the authority to
overturn the factual findings of the District as to what the Student’s misconduct was and whether 01' not
he committed that behavior. Even if the rationale in the OSEP letter cited by Parent was binding legal
authority, it would only serve to place the decision of whether or not to address a claim to overturn
Board’s factual ﬁndings of misconduct within the discretion of the hearing ofﬁcer, Under the
circumstances of this case, where the parties are fully engaged in contentious litigation of whether or not
the misconduct occurred in front of an expulsion hearing ofﬁcer, this hearing ofﬁcer would decline to
utilize that discretion even if she found she had the authority, which she does not

27. Based on Factual Findings 1 through 55 and Legal Conclusions 1—9, the District members of the
MD PPT correctly determined that Student's conduct was not caused by Student’s autism and was not
directly and substantially related to Student's autism.

In the course of the hearing it was established that one characteristic of Student’s disability is slow
processing speed. Testing indicated that certain simple tasks such as copying down things from the
board will take excessive time for Student in comparison with peers. No evidence ofa causal or direct
and substantial relationship between slow processing speed and Student’s misconduct was produced. To
the contrary, evidence was produced showing Student has a facility with computers and programming
that is not impeded by his slow processing speed. Student’s slow processing speed did not impede his
performance in his Computer D and P class, in which he had projects with deadlines to complete and in
which he received an A+. There was no evidence to show that Student could not fully comprehend what

13

October 9, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0121

he was doing when he committed the misconduct because the nature of misconduct somehow involved
the completion of a series of tasks in a limited period of time. Evidence showed that Student had
signiﬁcant access to computers at school throughout the day and at the home of each parent. Student
also spent a lot of time on his computer particularly at one Parent’s home. Further, Student admitted to
having the ability to hack into other students’ computers in order to remotely shut them down, thereby
demonstrating his ability to gain the technical skills necessary to engage in hacking behavior despite his
low processing speed. The same ﬁndings hold true when looking for any comteetion, causal, direct or
otherwise between Student’s lower than average intellect and the misconduct in question. No such
connection can be found, especially given Student’s academic performance in the ﬁeld in which he is
accused ol’committing misconduct and admitted acts of hacking.

In the area of communication, Student’s disability manifests itself as a deﬁciency in the area of
pragmatic language. Student is literal and struggles with nuance. The language in the Network
Guidelines in the Student Handbook is clear and unambiguous, and does not require inferences be drawn
or the application of knowledge of social nuance. Sufﬁcient evidence was not produced to establish a
causal or direct or substantial relationship was established between Student’s difﬁculties in pragmatic
language and the misconduct. Student’s struggles with communication are at their most evident in areas
01‘ little interest to Student. Computer hacking was an area of interest for Student. Student did not have
the same stmggle with speaking when he was speaking about topics that interested him, rather he had
trouble remembering to pause and give another person an opportunity to contribute. It cannot be said
that but for Student’s pragmatic language difﬁculties, the misconduct would not have occurred Nor can
it be said that but for Student’s social difﬁculties the misconduct would not have occurred. The
Student’s autism manifests itself in the social sphere in the following ways: Student has difﬁculty
initiating and maintaining social interaction during unstructured time or when topics discussed are not
within his areas ot‘interest. Student does not appear to socialize with other Students outside of school,
except through online computer gaming. Computer hacking does not require social interaction, with the
advent of youtube and the utilization ot‘search engines, anyone can educate themselves on the topic
without ever interacting with another human being. Student indicated he had researched hacking on the
internet. He obtained the skills to remotely shutdown another student’s computer and change the
background on a teacher’s computer and applied those skills. There is no evidence that pragmatic
language or social interaction were utilized or required in order to successfully engage in hacking.

28. Based on Factual Findings 1 through 55, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 9, the MD PPT correctly
concluded the Student’s conduct was not the result of a failure to implement the Student’s IEP. The
goals, objectives and accommodations developed in the course of the annual review PPT meeting held
on May 6, 2013 as set out in the IEP in effect at the time of the MD meeting were agreed upon by
parents and the school based team. No concerns regarding implementation were raised during the annual
review PPT meeting. (Testimony of Parent; B-56).

The concerns about implementation regarding the IEP raised by family at the MD PPT meeting
centered around the accommodations of preferential seating. (B—69). “Preferential seating — close to
instruction” was listed as an environmental accommodation in the May 6, 2013 IEP. No evidence was
presented during the hearing to establish conclusively that Student did not receive preferential seating
when appropriate No evidence was presented that there was or could be a relationship between
Student’s need for a preferential seating accommodation to access the curriculum and Student’s
behaviors relating to the intentional misuse of computers. Concerns were raised during the hearing about
whether the Student’s computer classes were unstructured environments, which could have led to the
misconduct in question. Student excelled in his Computer Game D and 1’ course, and was also receiving
a B in his other computer course, Computer Aided Design. If Student’s disability manifested itself in

14

October 9, 20l3 Final Decision and Order 14-0] 2]

such a way that he did better in structured settings than unstructured ones, it would appear from
Student’s achievement in that coursework that the computer classes had a structure that worked for
Student.

Student’s academic success in 10th grade, which showed academic improvement over Student’s
freshman year indicates that services and accommodations were successfully being utilized. Student
successfully accessed the general curriculum with the supports and accommodations in place through
Student’s IEP for the 2012—2013 school year. Student’s social skills were addressed in group sessions
with other students with disabilities, in which they addressed challenges and identiﬁed areas for growth

29‘ Based on Factual Findings 56 through 64, and Legal Conclusions 22, 23 and 24, the IAES into
which the Student has been placed is appropriate. Parent’s objections to the CES—TDP were based solely
on experiences with a program for elementary school children at CES over 9 years ago. In contrast to
homebound instruction, the CBS—TDP provides a structured enviromnent for a Student who requires
structure to succeed. The Program’s therapeutic component will assist Student, who has difficulty with
transitions, in navigating a new school setting until such time as it is possible to transition him back into
a regular education setting. The Student will receive the sewices and special education instruction in his
IEP through the CES—TDP. In addition, the relative proximity of the CES—TDP to Fairﬁeld W arde High
School will facilitate contact between service providers at Fairfield Warde and Student and his CES—
TDP teachers and providers. This proximity will aid monitoring of Student’s progress and planning for
transition back into a regular education setting. A PPT meeting is scheduled one month into Student’s
placement at the CES—TDP to review the Student’s IEP will allow for modiﬁcations to the program at
the CES-TDP, should the need arise.

30. Based on Legal Conclusion 25, the Student is not entitled to an award of Compensatory Education
The current Interim Alternative Educational Setting of homebound instruction, in which the Student has
been enrolled since being removed from school in June of 2013, was chosen by Parents over the
recommendations of the MD PPT, which determined the CES—TDP to be the appropriate placement.
Action regarding placement of the Student at CES-TDP has been held in abeyance, pending the outcome
of the expulsion and special education due process hearings being held concurrently. No evidence was
produced that Parents informed school that they were rejecting the homebound instruction and services
being provided by the Board during the pendency of the two hearings. No evidence was produced that
the homebound instmction and sewices were not reasonably calculated to provide student with an
educational beneﬁt or that Student has not made progress towards his goals and objectives as a result of
his homebound instruction. Parents’ presentation during the hearing focused on the perceived
deﬁciencies of the proposed lAES, not the actual IAES. As the proposed IAES of CES—TDP has been
deemed appropriate, and n0 deﬁciencies in the current IAES of homebound tutoring program were
identified, an award of compensatory education is not appropriate.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board did not err when it found that Student’s conduct was not a manifestation of his
disability.

2. The Interim Alternative Educational Setting of the CES-TDP offered to the Student for the
period of his expulsion is appropriate.

3. Student is not entitled to an award ot‘compensatory education.

15

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student‘requhing special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
receipt thereof, the S tate Board of Education shall také appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hean'ng ofﬁcer. .

Appeals ﬁom the hearing decision ofthe hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A). '

jab". 1’4,:4}"/j//;_
Mm ‘r um”

, /<{/
”(Hearing Ofﬁcer Sigﬁhture

Brath H FHOV]:

Hearing Ofﬁcer Namein Print

¢

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

 

