November 25, 2013 Case No. 14—021 8

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Winchester Board of Education]
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents, pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Mark Sommaruga
Pullman & Comley, LLC

90 State House Square
Hartford, CT 06103-3702

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board deny the Student FAPE during the 2012—13 school year?
2. ls the Student entitled to compensatory education?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

This hearing request was submitted by the Parents, but the initial copy of the hearing request
received was too light and could not be read. Therefore, both palties agreed that the Board
received the request for hearing when a better copy of the hearing request was received by the
Board on October 17, 2013. A prehearing conference convened 011 October 22, 2013, At the
prehearing conference the parties indicated that a resolution session would be convened.

On November 12, 2013 the Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss the case. The Parents submitted a
response to the Motion on November 13, 2013. The parties were notiﬁed that the Motion and
response thereto would be considered at the ﬁrst hearing date.

On November 22, 2013, at the ﬁrst hearing date, the parties were provided time at their request
to attempt to resolve the case. When the hearing convened the Parents conﬁrmed that their

settlement discussions were successful and that they were withdrawing their request for hearing.
Therefore, this matter is dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school distiict responsible f01
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hean'ng oﬁicer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hean'ng ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
coun by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4~183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A). \|//

/./’ / r
{/z/J/ll //
Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

 

 

