November 5, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0160

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Ridgeﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
Attorney Liz Moyse
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses
Berchem Moses & Devlin

75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney
via letter dated September 9, 2013.] It was received by Board of Education’s (“BOE’S”) Attorney on
September 9. The 30-day1'esoluti0n period ended October 9. The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal
decision and order was November 23, 2013.
A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on October 4. Attorney Moyse appeared on
behalf of Student and Attorney Moses appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issues were identiﬁed:
1. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the
2012—13 school year?

2. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the
2013 extended school year?

3. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during the

2013-14 school year?
4. If the answer to any of the above Issues One through Three is in the afﬁrmative, what shall be the
remedy?
Via e—mail dated October 11, Student’s Attorney requested an extension of the mailing date to
accommodate the hearing schedule. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request for an
extension was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until

December 23, 2013.
The parties participated in private mediation on October 18. Student’s Attorney indicated that the

paities were not able to reach a ﬁnal agreement but did make progress towards that end; that if an
agreement is not reached, Student’s Parents have indicated an interest in having an updated observation
of Student by the speech pathologist; and that given scheduling difﬁculties, Student’s Parents wish to
withdraw their request for Due Process without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed without prejudice.

‘ All dates are 2013 unless otherwise indicated.

 

I ' Ifthe local or regional board ofcducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
' “‘Brcm’ding special education for the student requiring spcéial edu'cation does not take
action'on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after .
receipt thereof, the Stat'e Board of Education shall take appmpriptc action to enforce the

ﬁndin'gs or-prcscription of the hearing ofﬁccr.

_ Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
coun by either party in accprdancc With the provisidns ofScction 4-183, Connecticut
Gcn§ral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

' g Ofﬁcer Signature

Q‘PrN l3 CHQEQMJN

, Heén'ng Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

signpagcdoc (bu disk)
4/l/o4 ‘ ‘ ,

0. -.~.,.-_..4'-"' - W

 

 

