August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0602

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Connecticut Technical High School System (“CTHHS”)

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Peter Ruppert, Esq.
Attorney at Law
180 Warwick Avenue
Fairﬁeld, CT 06825

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Craig Meuser, Esq.
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Sylvia H0, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

Did the Board provide appropriate programs for the 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 school years?

Did the Board provide an appropriate transition program?

Should the Board be required to fund an independent psychoeducational evaluation of Student?
Should the Board be required to fund an independent evaluation through a plumbing apprenticeship
to conﬁrm his credentials as an “advanced apprentice”?

5. Should the Board be required to fund Student’s attendance at a Connecticut community college for
post secondary education?

:“WF’.H

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on June 17, 20l4. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
conducted a Prehearing Conference on June 23, 2014. The Hearing was scheduled for August 5 and 6,
2014. The mailing date of the F inal Decision was August 29, 2014.

The Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss issues 4 and 5 0f the Hearing Request on J une 30, 2014. The
Parent did not ﬁle an opposition to the Board’s Motion to Dismiss. On July 11, 2014, the Board
requested that the Board Motion to Dismiss be granted, On July 17, 2014, the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted
the Board’s unopposed Motion to Dismiss. On July 29, 2014, Parents ﬁled a Request for Postponement
of the hearing and for an Advismy Opinion. In response, the Hearing Ofﬁcer inquired of Parent’s
counsel whether the Request for Advisory Opinion had been ﬁled with the Connecticut State
Department of Education’s Due Process Unit because the Hearing Ofﬁcer could not be assigned to
render an Advisory Opinion on the same case. Parent’s counsel responded that he had not, Later,
Parent’s counsel advised that the Board was not in agreement with the Parent’s Request for an Advisory
Opinion. On July 31, 2014, Board’s counsel indicated that the Board would object to proceeding to

 

August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0602

hearing on August 5 and 6 because the Board had not received the Parent’s list of witnesses and
exhibits. The hearing date was rescheduled to August 13, 2014. Two days prior to the hearing, Parent’s
counsel informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer and Board counsel that he had been handling the matter on a pro
bono basis and that he would be withdrawing as Parent’s attorney on August 15 because he would be
starting a new position and could not continue as counsel. He further stated that he had informed the
Parent of this He also informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer and the Board’s attomey that the Parent had health
issues and was undergoing an operation.

The Hearing commenced on August 13, 2014. The Hearing Request was entered into evidence as
Exhibit H.0-l. The issues of the Hearing were identiﬁed and it was noted on the record that issues 4
and 5 above were dismissed because the Hearing Ofﬁcer lacked jurisdiction to decide these issues in a
Special Education Due Process Hearing. Prior to the presentation of evidence, two issues were before
the Hearing Ofﬁcer. First, the Hearing Ofﬁcer received into evidence as H.O.—2, a document conﬁrming
the Parent’s appointment as the Student’s Consewator and H.O.—3, a Power of Attorney signed by the
Student to allow Parent to represent the Student since Student is over eighteen (18) years old. Second,
Parent’s attorney stated that he would not be able to continue with the hearing after August 13, 2014. A
second hearing date of August 27, 2014 had been identiﬁed for Board witnesses to be available for
Parent’s examination but the Parent attorney could not be available during the day because he was
beginning new employment. The Board objected to commencing the hearing on August 13, 2014 on the
grounds that continuing with a pro se Parent or a new attorney would be confusing and prejudicial to all
parties. The Hearing Ofﬁcer encouraged the Parent’s attorney to contact Statewide Legal Sewices to
help secure another attorney for Parent.

Parent also inquired of the Hearing Ofﬁcer through his attorney the ramiﬁcations of withdrawing the
Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request at that time. The Hearing Ofﬁcer informed the Parent that
prior to the presentation of evidence, the Parent would be able to withdraw the Hearing Request and that
the dismissal would be Without prejudice to the case, which meant that it could be ﬁled again at a later
time. If the Parent decided to go forward with the hearing and presented evidence, he would not be able
to withdraw the matter without prejudice. The hearing was adjourned so that the Parent and his attorney
could decide whether to withdraw the matter without prejudice. After a short conference, the Parent’s
attorney stated that the Parent had decided to go fmward.

The Parent presented two witnesses on August 13, 2014. They were Parent and Michael Scott, a regular
education shop teacher in the ﬁeld of plumbing. The Parent presented Exhibits P—l through P-8; P-10
and P—l 1; P—13 through P—18; and P—20 through P—27 as full exhibits. P—9 and P-17 were admitted for
identiﬁcation only. P—19 was not admitted as an exhibit. The Parent listed as witnesses: Parent; Student
and a number of Board employees, including the Special Education Teacher; Guidance Counselor;
Plumbing Department Head; Plumbing Trade Instructor; Social Worker; Career Development Teacher
and the Board’s Special Education Consultant Board Exhibits B-l through B-3l were admitted as full
exhibits. The resume of Michael Scott was later provided by the Board and accepted into evidence
subsequently as B-32.

On August 20, 2014, the Parent sent an email correspondence to the Hearing Ofﬁcer and the Board
attorney stating that his health condition had gotten worse, that he was being attended to by a doctor and
advised to stay off his feet and could not do anything until further notice. The Parent stated that the
Hearing Ofﬁcer and the Board’s attorney would receive a note from the Parent’s doctor the next day.

 

August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0602

H.0-4. On August 21, 2014, the Hearing Ofﬁcer wrote back to the Parent and Parent’s former attorney
inquiring of whether the Parent had substitute counsel. The Hearing Ofﬁcer further stated that the
mailing date of the Final Decision was August 29, 2014 and that Parent’s former counsel should consult
with Parent about his legal options. The Hearing Ofﬁcer further informed Parent’s former counsel that
the hearing was going forward and Parent was in need of substitute counsel. Parent’s attorney wrote
back that he had advised Parent to ﬁle a pro se appearance with the Hearing Ofﬁcer and the Connecticut
State Department of Education Due Process Unit and that he had contacted Statewide Legal Services to
seek alternate counsel for the Parent. The Hearing Ofﬁcer stated that the matter was scheduled for
August 27, 2014 and that the Hearing Ofﬁcer had no authority to extend the mailing date of the Final
Decision.

On August 27, 2014, the Parent’s now former attorney stated that he had not heard from Parent and had
no idea whether the Parent had secured a new attorney and that he had not received any response to his
voicemails or emails to Parent. He stated that he was unavailable to attend the hearing until 4:00 pm.
Having not heard from the Parent, he could not say whether the Student would be a witness. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer responded that the hearing was going forward as noticed and that the Parent’s former
attorney was not expected to appear since he had withdrawn and was newly employed.

The hearing commenced at 10:20 am. Neither the Parent not substitute counsel appeared at the hearing.
The Hearing Ofﬁcer noted on the record that she had not received any doctor’s note from the Parent’s
doctor as promised by the Parent. The Hearing Ofﬁcer inquired of the Board’s attorney as to whether
the Board had received any correspondence from Parent; the Board had not. The Board’s attorney had
received a voicemail from Parent’s former attorney offering to appear at 4:00 pm to examine the
CTHHS Board’s Educational Consultant. The Hearing Ofﬁcer dismissed the matter under R,S.C.A. 10-
76h-14(a) for the Parent’s failure to meet his burden to go forward with the evidence and R,S.C.A. 10-
76h~l8(a)(1) for failure to prosecute the Hearing Request.

SUMMARY:

Parent of a 18 year old Student studying plumbing at a vocational and technical program brought a Due
Process Complaint/Hearing Request seeking an independent psychoeducational evaluation, an
evaluation of the Student’s plumbing competencies and community college at Board expense. Prior to
the commencement of the hearing, the Parent’s volunteer attorney informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that he
planned to withdraw from representation of the Parent at the end of the ﬁrst hearing day. Parent’s
attomey was encouraged to seek substitute legal counsel for the Parent. The Parent, who was having
health issues, considered withdrawing the matter without prejudice and reﬁling the matter, and was
informed that the matter could not be withdrawn without prejudice after the presentation of evidence.
Parent, who had the advice of counsel, chose to go forward with the evidence. The Parent testimony
revealed that his main concerns involved the Student’s competency in the plumbing trade and how the
Student would fare after high school. On the day of the hearing, the Parent did not produce evidence
involving the appropriateness of the Student’s special education program or transition plan. Seven days
prior to the second hearing date, Parent sent an email stating that his health issues precluded him from
attending the second hearing because he was under a doctor’s care. He stated that he would be sending a
doctor’s note the next day. The hearing reconvened and neither Parent nor substitute legal counsel
appeared. The matter was dismissed pursuant to Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies

 

August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0602

(“R.C.S.A.”) Section 10—7611—14(a) for Parent’s fai1ure to meet the burden to go forward with the
evidence and Section10—76h—18(a)(1) for failure to prosecute the hearing.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10-76h
and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(t) and related regulations, and in accordance with
the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4-181a
and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:
The following facts are undisputed by the panties and are material to the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s decision.

1. Student is now 18 years of age (biith date November 19, 1995) and was receiving special education
sewices under the disability category of Autism at EC Goodwin High School. The Student attended
EC Goodwin for four years and participated in graduation but did not receive a diploma. (Due
Process Complaint) (Testimony, Parent)

2. The Hearing Request alleged that Student was denied a free and appropriate public education
(“FAPE”) because the Student did not receive an appropriate program designed to meet his unique
needs; that his program lacked measurable post secondary goals and that he was not prepared to exit
special education and related services. The Due Process Complaint, among other things, requested
that an independent evaluator be appointed to conﬁrm Student’s “credentials as an advanced
apprentice” at the Board’s expense and that Student be enr011ed at a Connecticut Community
College at Board expense. Further, the Complaint requested that the Student undergo an
independent psychoeducational evaluation at Board expense so that a new IEP could be developed
for Student. (Due Process Complaint)

3. The Parent presented his testimony during the ﬁrst day of the hearing, which testimony was
completed and cross—examined. The Parent testiﬁed that he was not satisﬁed that the Student’s
regular education plumbing program was an effective program. The Parent testiﬁed that the Student
was lost in trying to repair a friend’s garbage disposal. Further, he did not trust the EC Goodwin’s
regular education plumbing teacher because the teacher had not given him proof that the Student was
able to install a toilet. The Parent has no plumbing experience. He was also dissatisﬁed that he did
not see the Student’s homework although he never asked for homework at a PPT meeting. He also
did not understand and disagreed with the differences in results of the Student’s CAPT scores and
his higher grades in his regular education classes. The Parent feels that the School should provide
more services for Student in plumbing, math, writing and reading. The Parent testiﬁed that the
Student should be “at least. . .be able to read and write add and subtract. ..as a high school graduate.”
(Testimony, Parent)

4. The Student’s regular education plumbing teacher, a Parent witness, testiﬁed that Student was
performing well and kept up with his non—disabled peers both in academic work on the theories
behind plumbing and in practical application of what he had learned. The teacher testiﬁed that
although Student had the accommodation of extra time on tests and quizzes on his IEP, Student did

 

August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0602

not need to use extra time and generally performed well on tests and kept up with non—disabled
peers. The Student was competent and was able to perform plumbing work on a hands—on basis at a
skill level similar to that of non—disabled peers. His grades in academic performance, without
utilizing special education accommodations, and in Plumbing were similar to non—disabled peers.
His teacher testiﬁed that the next step for the Student was to gain a driver’s license and to obtain an
apprenticeship with a plumber. (Testimony, M. Scott)

The Parent’s primary complaint with the Board is his general concern about the preparedness for life
after high school. The Parent’s testimony about his concerns was extensive and none of these
concerns involve the special education program 01‘ services. In fact, the Student performed similarly
to non—disabled peers without utilizing special education supports or accommodations. There is
neither evidence from Parent’s witnesses’ testimony nor from the educational record to draw a
conclusion that the Student’s special education program was inappropriate or to support other claims
in the Due Process Complaint. The evidence did not support the Parent’s general statements that the
Student could not read 01'w1'ite 01' do math. The evidence showed that the Student was in fact
prepared to exit special education services and leave high school and continue training as an
apprentice in the plumbing ﬁeld. There was no evidence that Student’s special education or
transition program was inappropriate. (Testimony, M. Scott; Testimony, Parent; Exhibits P—21 and
P—24).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

This administrative hearing was commenced pursuant to the IDEA and applicable Connecticut
special education law. Pursuant to the IDEA, a local educational agency (“LEA“) is responsible for
providing disabled children within its jurisdiction with a free and appropriate public education
program (“FAPE”) in the least restrictive environment (“LRE”). See 20 U.S.C. §§ 1412(a)(1);
l412(a)(5)(A). When there is a disagreement between the parents of such a child and the LEA over
whether the LEA has satisﬁed its obligations under the IDEA, the parents may commence a special
education due process hearing and thereafter seek review of the hearing ofﬁcer‘s decision by a court
if they are aggrieved by that decision.

Under the IDEA, where the parents of a child challenge a special education program proposed by an
LEA, the issue to be resolved is whether the LEA's proposed program provides the child with a

F APE as determined by applying the two prong test stated in Board of Education ofHendrick
Hudson School District v. Rowley, 458 US. 176, 206-07 (1982).

Under Rowley, the Board's program would provide the Student With a FAPE if the proposed
Individualized Education Program ("lEP"): (1) was developed in compliance with the IDEA‘s
procedural requirements; and (2) was "reasonably calculated to enable [the Student] to receive
educational beneﬁts," or, in other words, "likely" to produce more than trivial or de minimis
progress. 1d. The IDEA does not require that the Board provide the best program money can buy or
provide a program that has all of the features that the Parents desire. The IDEA requires the “doors
of public education [to] be opened for a disabled child in a “meaningful” way.” Walczak V. F [orida
Union Free School District, 27 IDELR 1135 (2d Cir 1998). However, it does not guarantee
“everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents.” Id. at 132.

 

August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0602

4. The subject matter jurisdiction of IDEA due process hearings and impaitial hearing ofﬁcers is
deﬁned under state and federal law. The IDEA states that impaitial hearing ofﬁcers and due process
hearings are to decide issues outlined in 20 U.S.C. §l415(b)(6)(A) or (k)l. 20 U.S.C.
§l415(b)(6)(A) deﬁnes the subject matter as “matter[s] relating to the identiﬁcation, evaluation, or
educational placement of the child, or the provision of a free appropriate public education to such
child”. 20 U.S,C. §l415(b)(6)(A) and see also, 20 U.S.C. §l4lS(f)(l)(A). The hearings are a means
of resolving complaints when an LEA either “(A) proposes to initiate or change; or (B) refuses to
initiate or change, the identiﬁcation, evaluation, or educational placement of the child, or the
provision of a free appropriate public education to the child.” 20 U.S.C. §l415(b)(7)(A)(lll).

5. §lO—76h of the Connecticut General Statutes conﬁnes the jurisdiction of Hearing Ofﬁcers to
conﬁrming, modifying or rejecting the identiﬁcation, evaluation or educational placement of or the
provision of FAPE to a child, to determining the appropriateness of a unilateral placement of a child
or to prescribing alternative special education programs for a child.

6. The Parent’s concerns do not involve special education. The Parent is generally concerned about
whether the Student would be a competent plumbing apprentice. (Finding of Fact No. 3)

7. "When the handicapped child is being educated in the regular classrooms of a public school system,
the achievement ofpassing marks and advancement from grade to grade will be one important factor
in determining educational benefit." Rowley at 207 n.28. Although the Student was eligible for
special education services, the Student performed similarly to non-disabled peers and was ready to
graduate and become a plumbing apprentice, which would have been the next step in his training to
become a plumber. (Finding of Fact N0. 4)

8. R.C.SiA. Section 10—76h—l4(a) places the burden on the party who ﬁled for due process with the
burden of going forward with the evidence. The Parent had not brought forward any evidence to
support the claims in the Due Process Complaint that the Student’s special education program was
inappropriate. Fmtherrnore, the Parent’s concerns do not involve the Student’s special education
program but a general concem about how the Student would fare after high school. The Parent has
not met this burden.

9. RAC.S.A. Section lO—76h—18(a) provides that “the hearing ofﬁcer may order, sua sponte, an entry of
default or dismissal for failure of any party (1) to prosecute a hearing.” The Parent was aware on the
ﬁrst day of the hearing that his attorney was planning to withdraw. The Parent was aware of his own
health problems. He considered withdrawing the Due Process Complaint without prejudice and was
informed of the consequences of going forward with the hearing by the Hearing Ofﬁcer. He had the
beneﬁt of legal advice from his counsel. He nevertheless decided to proceed with the hearing; he
testiﬁed and presented the testimony of the regular education—plumbing teacher. He neither secured
a new counsel nor responded to his former counsel nor sent a doctor’s note as stated in his
correspondence with the Hearing Ofﬁcer.

1 Due Process Hearing Ofﬁcers also have jurisdiction to decide issues involving alternative educational
settings under 20 U.S.C. §l415(l(). The present Due Process Complaint does not raise any issues
relating to alternative educational settings and thus, no discussion is required.

6

 

August 29, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0602

10. R.C.S.A. Section 10—76h—7(c) states that “[t]he hearing, including the mailing of the ﬁnal decision
and order, shall be completed within the forty—ﬁve day timeline established in Pait B of the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 USC 1400, et seq. and the regulations adopted
thereunder, as amended from time to time. .. A speciﬁc extension of the forty—ﬁve day timeline may
be granted at the request of a paity to the hearing. . .” 34 C.F.Ri § 300.515 (a) states that “[t]he
public agency must ensure that no later than 45 days after the expiration of the 30 day period under
§300.510(b), 01' the adjusted time periods described in §300.510(c)— (1) a ﬁnal decision is reached in
the hearing; and (2) a copy of the decision is mailed to each of the parties.” 34 CPR. §300.515(c)
states that [a] hearing ofﬁcer may grant speciﬁc extensions of time beyond the periods set out in
paragraph (a) and (b) of this section at the request of either paity.” Neither Parent nor Parent’s
former counsel requested an extension of the 45-daytime1ine. The Board has not requested an
extension of the 45—day timeline The Hearing Ofﬁcer lacks the authority to extend the timeline
under these circumstances and is bound to render a decision in this matter and does so for the
reasons cited herein.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after'
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Wm

 

 

He’ariné/Ofﬂcer Signature
Svlvia H0
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

