April 9, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0356

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Haltford Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of Student: Parents, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Melinda B. Kaufmann
Assistant Corporation Counsel
City of Hartford
550 Main Street
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: J anis C. Jennan
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Parents Via letter dated J anuary 29, 2014.1 The 30—day resolution period ended March 5 and the
deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is April 19.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on February 21. Student’s Mother
appeared on behalf of Student. No one appeared on behalf of BOB. The Hearing Ofﬁcer waited
several minutes and then e-mailed BOE’s designated representative asking her to join the
conference call. The Hearing Ofﬁcer waited an additional ﬁve minutes and then proceeded with
the pre-hearing conference call.2

The following issue was identiﬁed: Is Board of Education required to provide Student a
one-on-one nurse?

Hearing was scheduled for April 1 1. Via e-mai1 dated March 24, Attorney Kaufmann
indicated that she received the Notice of Hearing from BOE but did not receive other previous
notices in the case. She also indicated that the palties settled the case in the resolution session.

Student’s Parents conﬁrmed that the case was settled.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed.

' All dates are 2014 unless othenvise indicated,

2 The Notice of Pre-hearing Conference was sent to BOE’s designated representative with a request for a delivery
receipt. An electronic delivery receipt was received by the Hearing Ofﬁcer, A simiIar delivery receipt was received
for the follow-up e-mail asking her to join the conference call.

v

If the local or regional board of oducat1on or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
.“ptoyiding special education for the student requin'ng special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁcen days aﬁcr .
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educanon shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prcscription of the hearing ofﬁcer

' Appeals from the hearing dec1sion ofthc hearing oﬁﬁcer may bemade to state or federal
001111 by cithcr party in accprdance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
Gamma! Statutcs, and Title 20 United States‘Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

‘earm; 21an Ofﬁcer Signature

GPVN ‘5 C‘ @511wa

, Reigning Ofﬁcer Name 1'11 Print ,

 

sigupage. doc (ho disk)
4/lI04.

4 ,. .4. 1.: 1.1:. :.. wmﬂwu

