September 10, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0278

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Connecticut Technical High School System Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney David Shaw
Law Ofﬁce of David Shaw
34 Jerome Avenue, Suite 210
B1oomﬁeld, CT 06002

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser
30 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES

1. Is the Individualized Education Program (“IEP”) developed for the Student at
the November 8, 2013, Flaming and Placement Team (“PPT”) meeting
inappropriate because it was prepared before an appropriate analysis of the
Student’s maladaptive behaviors and a Behavior Intewention P1an(“BIP”)
were developed, before any analysis of the Student’s progress on goalsyand
objectives of the 2012-13 IEP was considered and before an evaluation of the
Student’s educational and transitional needs was conducted?

2. Is the Connecticut Technical High Schoo1 System Board of Education
(“Board”) responsible to pay for an evaluation secured by the Student if it
used that evaluation to comply with the Final Decision and Order of the
hearing ofﬁcer in Student v. Connecticut Technical High School System, Case
No. 13-0321?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Student ﬁled this Request for Impartial Due Process Hearing (“Request”) on
November 19, 2013. Another Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to deteimine
the case on November 20, 2013. A prehearing conference was conducted and
evidentiary hearings were scheduled. Attorney David Shaw appeared for the Student
and Attorney Christine Chinni appeared for the Board. Subsequently, the initial
Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer recused herself due to a scheduling issue and this Impartial
Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on December 12, 2013.

September 10, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0278

The Student ﬁled a Motion for Default for Failure to Appear and Defend dated
December 6, 2013. The Board then ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss Connecticut State
Board of Education, Connecticut Technical High School System and Howell Cheney
Technical High School as Parties on December 13, 2013. In response, the Student
ﬁled a Motion to Strike Second Motion to Dismiss on December 13, 2013.

On January 8, 2014, the Impaltial Hearing Ofﬁcer issued an Order addressing these
motions and dismissing some of the Student’s claims. Subsequently, on January 14,
2014 and J anuary 21, 2014, the Student requested that the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer
allow two separate amendments to the Request to add new issues. Each of the
Student’s requests was granted. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer later dismissed one of
the two new issues, allowing the second issue to survive.

Evidentiary hearings were convened on March 6, 2014 and March 7, 2014. The
parties each presented testimony ﬁ'om witnesses and offered documentary evidence
that was admitted into evidence.

At the conclusion of the hearings, the parties jointly requested a thilty—day
postponement and extension of the deadline to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in order to allow
the parties an opportunity to ﬁle briefs before the ﬁnal decision was issued. That
request was granted, and the deadline to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision was extended to April
25, 2014.

Subsequently, on April 4, 2014, the Student reported that the palties were in the
process of ﬁnalizing a global settlement that was being negotiated under the auspices
of the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut. The parties jointly
requested an additional thirty-day postponement of the deadline to ﬁle the ﬁnal
decision in order to allow the parties additional time for ﬁling the briefs in the case
should the settlement fall through. The request was granted.

Subsequently, the Student requested several additional thiity—day postponements 0f
the timeline to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in order to accommodate the need for approval
of the settlement by the Probate Court and the United States District Court, and to
allow the parties additional time for ﬁling briefs should the settlement fail. The
Board of Education did not oppose these requests, and the deadline to ﬁle the ﬁnal
decision in the case was ultimately extended to September 12, 2014.

On September 4, 2014, the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer requested that Counsel for the
Student report whether the matter is ready for dismissal. No report was provided. On
September 8, 2014, the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer directed Counsel for the Student to
show cause why this matter should not be dismissed for failure to prosecute and/or to
request a further extension of the deadline.

On September 9, 2014, Counsel for the Student reported to the Impartial Hearing
Ofﬁcer that the settlement had been ﬁnalized and approved by the Probate Court and

September 10, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0278
United States District Court. Counsel requested that the matter be dismissed with
prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and that this matter is
dismissed with prejudice.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬂmﬁw

Hearing O‘ﬁicer Signature

mop F5131)

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ “04

