July 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0558

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Westport Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Westport Attorney Megan Buxton

Board of Education: Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Elizabeth Moyse
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F, Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Was the triennial evaluation conducted by the Board of Education appropriate?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board of Education requested a special education due process hearing in the above-
captioned matter on May 28, 2014 in order to defend its triennial evaluation of the Student in
the face of the Student’s request for an independent educational evaluation at public expense.
This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case on May 29, 2014. A telephonic pre—
hearing conference was conducted on June 20, 2014. Attorney Megan Buxton appeared on
behalf of the Board of Education. Attorney Elizabeth Moyse appeared on behaIf of the
Student.

During the conference on June 20, 2014, the Student reported that the request for an

independent educational evaluation at public expense was withdrawn. In turn, the Board of
Education requested that the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer dismiss the matter.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board of Education’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is
dismissed.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@PW

Hearing OTﬁcer Signature

[110p FKIRD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

