June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0473

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Fairﬁeld Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalfof the Parent: Andrew Feinstein, Esq.
86 Denison Avenue
Mystic, CT 06355

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Carletha Texidor, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Is the Board’s psychoeducational evaluation appropriate?
2. Are Parents entitled to an independent educational evaluation (“IEE”) at public
expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/I-Ieariug Request on April 9, 2014. A
Prehearing Conference was conducted on April 24, 2014. The hearing convened on May
19, 2014 and May 28, 2014. On May 19, 2014, the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the parties’
request to extend the mailing date of the Final Decision from May 23, 2014 to June 20,
2014 to add the May 28, 2014 hearing date. On May 28, 2014, the Hearing Ofﬁcer
granted the parties’ request for an extension of the mailing date of the Final Decision to

J uly 1 1, 2014 in order for the parties to submit briefs. Both patties submitted proposed
ﬁndings of fact and briefs on June 16, 2014.

The Board presented the testimony of three witnesses. They were Laena DeMelo,
Rivcrﬁeld Elementary School Psychologist; Sarah Schilling, Riverﬁeld Elementary
Special Education Resource Room Teacher and Denise Moore, ijerﬁeld Elementary
School Speech and Language Pathologist. The Parents presented three witnesses. They
were Dr. Michael Cohen, a Neuropsychologist; Laurie Markus, Parent Advocate and the
Parent. The Board submitted as full exhibits B-1 through B-1 18. The Parent submitted
as full exhibits P-l through P—12. The Board’s Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request
was admitted as HO-l. During the course of the hearing, the Hearing Ofﬁcer requested
that the Board produce copies of the Stanford Binet Intelligence Scale—Fifth Edition
(2003) scoring table and instmctional material to the examiner. The Board provided a

1

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0473

copy of the scoring table, instructions to examiner and answer keys to the Hearing
Ofﬁcer and Parent’s attorney on June 1 1. This material was admitted on the record with
answer key information redacted as HO-2.

This Final Decision and Order sets fmth the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings of
facts and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference certain exhibits and
witness testimony and are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record.
All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. T0 the extent the
summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of facts actually represent conclusions of law,
they should so be considered and Vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. v. S & H Computer
Systems, Inc, 605 F. Supp. 816 (M.D1 Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F, Callallen
Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993).

SUMMARY:

At a triennial reevaluation review to determine Student’s continuing eligibility for special
education services and provide updates to Student’s IEP, the Parent disagreed with
cognitive testing results in the psychoeducational evaluation report and asked for an
independent educational evaluation The Board brought the Due Process
Complaint/Hearing Request to defend its psychoeducational evaluation under 34 C.F.R.
§300,502(b)(2)(i) and R.C.S.A. Sec. 10—76d—9.

STATEMENT OF J URISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(C.G.S.) §10—76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act
(U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4‘186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary
evidence and testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1, Student was born on February 7, 2006 and was attending the ﬁrst grade at Riverfield
Elementary School at the time of the hearing. Student has a medical diagnosis of
Congenital Myopathy and a complicated medical history. As of March 2014, he is
eligible for special education services under the category of Multiple Disabilities.
(Testimony, Parent, Exhibit B-108)

2. Student’s family moved to Fairﬁeld, Connecticut from another state. Prior to moving
to Fairﬁeld, he was identiﬁed being eligible for services under the category of
Developmental Delay (3-5). Student began receiving special education services in
Fairﬁeld after enrollng at the Board’s preschool, the Early Childhood Center (ECC),
(Testimony, Parent, Exhibit B-7)

3. In 201 1, when Student was age four years and nine months, the ECC staff conducted
a reevaluation review to determine continuing eligibility for special education

2

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0473

services and to prepare for the Student’s transition to kindergarten and develop a new
individualized education program (IEP) for the coming school year. (Exhibit B—7)

4, As a part of the reevaluation review process, the ECC staff conducted a number of
evaluations, including a psychoeducational evaluation. The psychoeducational
evaluation was conducted by the ECC School Psychologist and included a cognitive
testing by the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, Fifth Edition 2003 (SB-S) in which
Student earned a Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) score of 91. As a result of the review process,
Student’s category of disability was changed to Other Health Impairment (OHI) due
to the impact of Congenital Myopathy on Student’s learning and development.
(Exhibits B—S—B-13).

5. In April 2013, a Riverﬂeld Elementary School Planning and Placement Team (PPT)
met to plan for triennial reevaluation in May 2014. The PPT participants at this
meeting included the Parent, her Parent Advocate, the regular and special education
teachers, the School Psychologist, two occupational therapists, two physical
therapists, the school nurse and a school administrator. (Exhibit B-67).

6. The school—based members of the PPT discussed Student’s progress and presented
written reports of Student’s program and made recommendations. Parent provided
information about Student’s medical status and recent surgery. The PPT discussed
and recommended the assessments that would be administered. Parent requested that
the triennial reevaluations be done sooner than May 2014. (Exhibits B—67-B-68)

7. The PPT recommended and Parent agreed to the following evaluations. The PPT
agreed that no special accommodations 01‘ adaptations for student’s language, cultural
background or physical status were required to administer these evaluations:

1. An evaluation by the occupational therapist consisting of standardized
assessment and clinical observation of Student’s sensory processing, ﬁne
motor, Visual motor and Visual perception functioning.

2. An evaluation by the physical therapist consisting of standardized assessment
and clinical observation of Student’s gross motor functioning.

3. An evaluation by the speech and 1anguage pathologist consisting of
standardized assessment of Student’s speech articulation, pragmatic,
expressive and receptive language.

4. An evaluation by the special education teacher consisting of curriculum based
and standardized assessments ofStudent’s reading, writing and math.

5. An evaluation by the School Psychologist consisting of behavior rating scales
and one to one standardized assessment of Student’s attention, social, adaptive
behavior and cognitive skills. (Exhibit B-68).

8. The various professionals conducted their assessments and observations from October
2013 to J anualy 2014 and compiled evaluation repotts. (Exhibits B-91, B-93, B—96,
B-97, B-99, B-101-106)

9. The School Psychologist who conducted the psychoeducational evaluation holds a
Bachelor of Science degree in Psychology, a Masters of Science in School
Psychology and a Sixth Year Diploma in School Psychology. She is cettiﬁed by the
Connecticut Department of Education as a school psychologist, and she has worked
as a school psychologist for nearly twenty years and has worked in the school district
for nearly eighteen years. (Testimony, L. DeMelo, Exhibit B~1 16)

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0473

10.

11,

12.

14.

The School Psychologist’s psychoeducational evaluation was conducted over the
period of October 2013 to the end ot‘January 2014. Her evaluation included
classroom obsewations and standardized assessments. She administered the
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-IV (WISC—IV), Children’s Memory Scales
(CMS), Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Conners 3, and Social Responsiveness
ScaIe-2. These assessments covered the areas of general intelligence, cognition,
everyday communication, social and practical behaviors, attention and hyperactivity,
conduct disorders and oppositional deﬁance disorders, executive functioning and
memory. The psychoeducational evaluation also included information from the
Parent and the Student’s regular education and special education teachers about
Student’s behavior at home and in the classroom, (Testimony, L. DeMelo, Exhibit B-
93)

Student’s WISC—IV FSIQ score results showed a dramatic decline in functioning.
The W18C~IV is a widely recognized and commonly administered intelligence
assessment. Whereas, Student scored a FSIQ score of 91 in 2011, a score in the
average range, Student’s WISC—IV FSIQ score was 56, in the extremely low range.
(Testimony, DeMelo, Exhibits B-7, B—93).

To ensure the accuracy of the IQ score results, the School Psychologist performed a
second intelligence test, the Stanford Binet Intelligence Scale, Fifth Edition (SB-S);
another widely recognized and commonly administered assessment. The School
Psychologist decided to use the SB-S because it was the same intelligence—testing
instrument that yielded the 91 F SIQ score in the 2011 psychoeducational evaluation.
She thought she would be comparing “apples to apples”. The SB—S assessment also
provides accurate results for persons with verbal or motor impairments. One of the
unique features of the SB—S is its ability to consider the motor difficulties of the
person taking the assessment, If a person taking the assessment cannot complete the
nonverbal components of the assessment, which used manipulatives, then the verbal
IQ can be a stand—alone as a representation of a FSIQ. Student’s FSIQ score on the
SB—5 was 56, identical to the FSIQ score for the WISC-lV. (Testimony, L. DeMelo,
Exhibit HO-2).

. On March 7, 2014, the School Psychologist met to discuss the results of her

psychoeducational evaluation with the Parent. The Parent expressed surprise over the
signiﬁcant drop in intelligence testing results. The Parent asked whether the results
meant that the Student had an intellectual disability. She was upset about receiving
the news. She asked the School Psychologist whether the Student would be
categorized as “intellectually disabled”. The School Psychologist said “no”, and that
she thought the best description would be the category of “Multiple Disabilities”
based 011 the Student’s medical conditions. The Parent asked the School Psychologist
what would occur with Student’s IEP. The School Psychologist stated that the PPT
would discuss this and that the PPT would provide ways for which the Student could
be prompted with information and provided suggestions for the development of the
IEP The Parent requested changes to reﬂect that Student was suffering a facial rash
on the ﬁrst assessment session in October 2013. (Testimony, L. DeMelo, Testimony,
Parent)

On March 12, 2014, the PPT met to discuss the Student’s triennial reevaluation
results; to determine continuing eligibility for special education services; conduct an

4

J une 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0473

15.

16.

17.

18.

annual review and to develop a new IEP. In attendance were Student’s special
education and regular education teachers, occupational therapist, physical therapist,
speech and language pathologists, physical education teacher, a school administrator,
the Parent and a Parent Advocate. The members of the PPT reviewed the evaluations
and repoﬁs and agreed that Student continues to be eligible for special education
services. All the members of the PPT agreed that the Student’s eligibility
classiﬁcation should be changed to “Multiple Disabilities”. Based upon the cognitive
testing, the School Psychologist recommended additional modiﬁcations to Student’s
IEP, such as “shmtening tasks” and “templates for written work” and affirmed other
recommendations already included in the Student’s IEP such as eliminating visual
clutter and including organizational goals. (Testimony, DeMelo, Testimony,
Schilling, Testimony, Moore, Testimony, Parent, Exhibit B—108).
The Parent and her advocate disagreed with the results of the intelligence testing. The
School Psychologist stated that the second intelligence test (SB-S) was conducted to
conﬁrm the results of the first intelligence testing (WISC—IV). She stated that the
cognitive scores, memory testing and adaptive behavior results were all consistent.
The School Psychologist stated that the cognitive results were not driving the IEP
goals and objectives but would give input on strategies. (Testimony, Parent, Exhibit
B-108)
The school team members stated that they believed that they had sufﬁcient relevant
information to determine eligibility to receive special educational services and update
Student’s IEP. The school team offered to conduct further testing which the Parent
refused. Parent requested an independent educational evaluation at public expense.
(Testimony, L. DeMelo, Testimony, Parent, Testimony, L. Marcus, Testimony, D.
Moore, Testimony, S. Schilling, Exhibit B—108)
On March 23, 2014, the Board’s Coordinator of Special Education notiﬁed the
Parents that the Board intended to ﬁle a Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request to
defend the School Psychologist psychoeducational evaluation unless the Parent
withdrew the request for an independent educational evaluation. The ﬁrst paragraph
stated as follows:
“As you know, at the PPT meeting on March 12, 2014, the school reviewed the
results of its triennial evaluation which included a psychological evaluation. You
indicated during the meeting that you disagreed with the cognitive testing and
were requesting an independent educational evaluation (IEE) in this area. The
request was denied by the PPT, since the school based members of the PPT
believed that the school’s testing was appropriate and valid.” (ExhibitB—111)
On March 28, 2014, the Parents responded to the Board. The Parents’ letter stated, in
pertinent part, as follows:
“We write to correct the erroneous statement in the ﬁrst paragraph of your letter.
We assert that Fairﬁeld has failed to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of
[student] by limiting its work to a cognitive assessment. [Student] needs a
11e1u'opsychologica1 evaluation so that we can understand the discrepancies
between his recent scores and his scores three years ago, to explore the nature and
character 01‘ his learning, and to identify appropriate interventions to permit
[student] to make meaningful educational progress. Whether or not Laena
DeMelo correctly administered the test she gave is not the central issue. And her

5

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0473

19.

20.

21.

22.

23,

24.

25‘

offer to conduct further testing is not helpful because she lacks expertise to

conduct a full-scale neuropsychological evaluation.” (Exhibit B—l 12)
After the PPT meeting, the Parent retained a neuropsychologist to conduct a
neuropsychological evaluation of Student. The Parent had been considering having a
neuropsychological evaluation of Student prior to the March 12, 2014 PPT. Parent
and Student’s neurologist had been discussing the possibility of having a
neuropsychological evaluation after the Student reached school age. (Testimony,
Parent)
The Neuropsychologist testiﬁed at the hearing and challenged the validity of School
Psychologist’s 2014 intelligence testing. There was no challenge of the 201 1 results.
Those higher results were assumed to be accurate. Parent, Parent Advocate and the
Neuropsychologist all testiﬁed that the intelligence testing results would lead to a
labeling or stigma of Student as being intellectually disabled, notwithstanding the
Student’s current category of Multiple Disabilities. Parent and Parent Advocate
speculated that the intelligence testing reduced academic expectations. There is no
support in the educational record for this testimony. Although it is true that Student’s
math goals were revised and expectations reduced, it was because Student had been
struggling in math. Contrary to Parent and Parent Advocate’s belief that vocabulary
expectations in Student’s LEP were reduced, they were actually increased from 10
vocabulary words previously to 24 vocabulary words per quarter aﬁer the triennial
review. Parent and Parent Advocate had misread these portions of the IEP in coming
to their conclusion. (Testimony, M. Cohen, Testimony, Parent, Testimony, L. Markus
Exhibits B—88, B—108)
The Neuropsychologist testiﬁed that Student’s poor ﬁne motor control handling of
manipulatives would make the School Psychologist’s results unreliable. The
Neuropsychologist also testiﬁed that the Student’s mood may have affected the
reliability of the cognitive testing results because of the School Psychologist’s
reported that during the ﬁrst test session, the Student was unhappy initially with
having to switch rooms. The Parent testiﬁed that the Student had a facial rash on the
day of the ﬁrst test session and this may have affected the Student’s performance.
(Testimony, M, Cohen, Testimony, Parent)
After reviewing all of the testimonial and documentary evidence in the record, this
hearing ofﬁcer is not persuaded by this testimony.
With respect to the issue of unreliability caused by motor control issues, there are
several reasons why this would not be true. First, Parent testiﬁed that the Student’s
motor skills were the same or slightly improved. This evidence in the record suggests
that the 2013~2014 motor skills were the same if not better than motor skills in 2011
so that motor control would not have been a differentiating factor,
Second, the School Psychologist did not report problems with motor control in her
psychoeducational evaluation report. In fact, the School Psychologist testiﬁed that
Student had no problems with manipulation during testing.
T hird, Student’s nonverbal responses with manipulatives were a relative strength
compared to Student’s verbal responses. The examiner of the 201 1 313—5 observed
that “[g]enerally, [Student] was most easily engaged with activities that involved
objects to manipulate accompanied by demonstrations of the tasks when needed, than

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0473

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

by tasks that were primarily based on verbal directions and required verbal output.”
(Exhibit B-7)

Fourth, testing results show that Student scores in the non-verbal subtests were equal
to or higher than the verbal subtest. In other words, Student had equal difﬁculty with
verbal responses as with those requiring use of Inanipulatives. (Exhibit B—93)

Fifth, the psychoeducational evaluation report gives speciﬁc examples and
descriptions of Student in the testing environment. It is apparent that despite efforts
by the School Psychologist to cue or prompt correct verbal responses after a wrong
answer, the Student was annoyed and resistant. The Student would say that he
already answered the question. The Student verbal IQ score, which is supported by
detailed descriptions, is consistent with the nonverbal IQ score.

F inally, the SB-S allows the examiner to discard testing results when motor issues
present in the test environment. The motor issues did not present as problems in
testing sessions. Even if the nonverbal section of the SB-S had been discarded, the
Student’s FSIQ score on the SB—S, taking into account only the verbal section, would
have been about the same score. This consistency of nonverbal and verbal results
leads this Hearing Ofﬁcer to reject the “motor issues” theory of unreliability.
(Testimony, M. Cohen, Testimony, L. DeMelo, Testimony, Parent, Exhibits B-7, B—
93).

The Neuropsychologist also challenged the accuracy of the WISC-IV and the SB-S by
suggesting that Student’s negative mood could have affected the results. In the
psychoeducational report, the School Psychologist had reported that Student wanted
to be tested in the ﬁrst room because that was the room with toys and other items for
play. The Parent also testified that Student was suffering from a facial skin rash
during the ﬁrst session and suggested that this might have affected Student’s
performance. (Testimony, M. Cohen, Testimony, Parent)

Again, this Hearing Ofﬁcer is not persuaded by this testimony after a review of all of
the evidence in the record. First, the School Psychologist testiﬁed that the Student
acted appropriately and was attentive and attending to tasks during the testing
sessions. She did not notice that anything was bothering the Student. (Testimony, L.
DeMelo)

Second, these cognitive assessments were done over three sessions over the course of
a few months. Any negative mood because of the switching of rooms or skin rash in
the first session would not have affected the Student’s performance in the other
sessions. (Testimony, L. DeMelo, Exhibit B-93)

Third, the SB-S was given to the Student in a later session after the School
Psychologist had had an opportunity to review the WISC‘IV results. Had the issues
of mood affected WlSC—IV results, the SB-S would have revealed a different
outcome; but this was not the case. (Testimony, L. DeMelo)

Fourth, that the mood issue could not be a factor in reliability is clear when one
reviews obsewations of the Student’s behavior in the 2011 psychoeducational report.
111 201 l, the Student had the same problems adjusting to the test environment. The
ECC examiner noted, “[Student] initially warmed aﬁer only a brief period, but soon
realized that I was going to expect him to participate in structured exchanges that
would require his full participation. He began to whine, turn about in his chair, and
stamp his feet.” Despite this bad mood, Student’s scored a full-scale IQ of 91. This

7

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0473

34.

35.

36.

37.

suggests that Student’s initial mood should not have been a factor in the accuracy and
reliability of 2013-2014 cognitive testing. (Exhibit B-7)

This Hearing ofﬁcer ﬁnds persuasive evidence in the record that supports a ﬁnding
that the School Psychologist’s cognitive testing results were reliable and valid. First,
Student’s FSIQ was identical on two different assessments (WISC-IV and SB-5) that
were given at different times. (Exhibit B~93)

Second, results in various subtests of the SB—S and WISC-IV were consistent with
results of other assessments such as for Student’s functioning in memory between the
SB~5, WISC-IV and CMS. (Exhibit B-93)

Third, the psychoeducational report details Student’s behavior and use of syntax in
responding to simple questions that demonstrated sub average responses for someone
of his age. The consistency of all of this evidence points to a conclusion that the
cognitive testing was valid and reliable. (Exhibit B-93)

F inally, this Hearing Ofﬁcer ﬁnds the School Psychologist’s testimony to be
convincing and supported by the evidence. The School Psychologist testiﬁed that she
was concerned enough about the accuracy and reliability of the ﬁrst intelligence test
to administer a second test. She performed the identical 2011 test to “compare apples
to apples”. She was personally engaged in obtaining an accurate result and looked for
a reason why the IQ score would have declined so dramatically. When asked by this
Hearing Ofﬁcer about the reason why she believed the Student’s 1Q score would have
dropped so dramatically, the School Psychologist testiﬁed that the demands on the
Student increased from 2011 to 2014 and that the number of correct answers required
increase as a child moves from preschool age to elementary school age. A review of
the SB-S test producer’s instructions and scoring tables conﬁrms the School
Psychologist’s testimony. The number of questions and correct answers required for
the 91 IQ score at age four years and nine months are far fewer than that required of
Student at seven years and eleven months. In fact, it appears from the test producer’s
scoring tables that Student was able to produce correct answers, but far fewer than
that expected of an average student of the same age. Therefore, the Hearing Ofﬁcer
concludes that the psychoeducational evaluation results were valid and reliable.
(Testimony, L. DeMelo, Exhibits B—7, B-93, HO-2)1

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

2.

The Student is eligible for special education and related services as set forth in the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C §1401, et seq.

To ensure every child receives a free and appropriate public education as required by
the IDEA, each eligible child must have an Individual Education Program (“IEP”).
An IEP must include: (1) a statement of the child‘s levels ot‘academic achievement
and functional performance, (2) measurable annual goals, (3) a description of how
progress will be measured and when progress reports will be provided, and (4) a
statement of the special education sewices and supplementary aids to be provided. 20
U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(A); see 34 CPR, §300.320(a).

The IEP must be "reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational
benefits." Board ofEducarion of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District v.
Rowley, 458 US 176 at 206-07 (1982). An IEP need not maximize the potential ofa

8

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0473

disabled student, because Congress did not intend the IDEA to guarantee a speciﬁc
outcome, but to provide a basic level of educational oppmtunity. Rowley, 458 US. at
192, quoting S. Rep. No. 94-168, at 11 (1975).

4. Under the IDEA and Connecticut state law, a school district must reevaluate a student
who receives special education services at least once every three years. This triennial
reevaluation’s purpose is to evaluate a student's relevant functional, developmental,
and academic skills to determine whether the student continues to be eligible for
special education services and to provide any necessary updates to the student‘s IEP.
20 U.S.C. §1414(a)(2)(B)(ii); 34 C.F.R. §300.305(a)(2)(1)(B)(iv), R.C.S.A. Sec. 10—
76d-9(a).

5. If a student receives an evaluation with which the parent disagrees, a parent has a
right to an independent educational evaluation (“IEE’) at public expense, which
means at no cost to the parent. 34 CPR. § 300.502, R.C.S.A Sec. 10-76d-9(c)(1) and
(2). If a parent requests an IEE at public expense, the school district must, without
unnecessary delay, ensure either an IEE is provided at public expense or initiate an
impaﬂial hearing to show that its evaluation is appropriate 01' that the evaluation
obtained by the parent does not meet the school district criteria. 1f the impartial
hearing ofﬁcer ﬁnds that a school district’s evaluation is appropriate, a parent may not
obtain an IEE at public expense. 34 C.F.R.§ 300.502; R,C.S,A. Sec. 10-76d-9(a).

6. The IDEA only requires “the door of public education [to] be opened for a disabled
child in a ”meaningful' way." Walczak v Florida Union Free School District, 27
IDELR 1135, 142 F.3d at 130 (2d Cir 1998), citing Rowley, supra. However, it does
not guarantee "everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents." 10'. at
132. An “appropriate” reevaluation is one that complies with IDEA and Connecticut
regulations to produce information on Student‘s relevant functional, devetopmental,
and academic skills to determine whether the student continues to be eligible for
special education services and to determine to provide any necessary updates to the
student's IEP. 34 CPR §300.301—§300.305; R.C.S.A. Sec. 10—76d—9(a).

7. The purpose of reevaluation under the IDEA is to determine continuing eligibility and
to provide necessary updates and modiﬁcations for the Student’s IEP. A particular
eligibility classiﬁcation is immaterial to providing a free and appropriate public
education so long as the IEP is tailored to the unique needs of the student. 20 U.S.C.
§1414(a)(2)(B)(ii); 34 C.F.R. §300.305(a)(2)(])(B)(iv), R.C.S.A. Sec. 10-76d-9; Fort
Osage R—I School District v. Sims, 56 IDELR 282 (8th Cir. 201 1); see also Torda v.
Failjﬂlx County School Board, 61 IDELR 4 (4th Cir. 2013, unpublished), cert. denied,
(US. 03/24/14) (No. 13-6908).

8. 1DEA regulations provide standards for the manner in which evaluations are to be
conducted. These standards are set forth in 34 CPR §300.300 to 34 CPR.
§300.31 1. Connecticut state regulations implement LDEA regulations in R.C.S.A.
See. 10-76d—9(a).

9. This evaluation must include a variety ofassessment tools and strategies to gather
relevant functional, developmental and academic information about the child,
including information provided by the parent. The tools used must be
nondiscriminatory on a racial or cultural basis and be administered in a language or
form most likely to yield accurate information on what the child knows and can do
academically, developmentally and functiona11y and be geared to providing relevant

9

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0473

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

information to assist in determining the educational needs of the child. 20 U.SlC.
§1414(a)(2)(B)(ii), (3)(A)(i—ii); 34 C.F.R. §304; R.C.S.A. Sec. 10-76-9(a).

No single measure 01‘ assessment may be used as the sole criterion for determining
eligibility for special education services and for determining the appropriate program.
Evaluators must be trained and knowledgeable and appropriately ce1tiﬁed and/or
licensed to administer assessments and measures and administer the assessments in
accordance with the test producer’s instructions. 34 C.F.R. §300.304(b)(1) and (2)
and (c)(iv); R.C.S.A. Sec. 10-76-9(a).

The instruments used for assessments must be technically sound and may be used to
assess the relative contribution of cognitive and behavioral factors, in addition to
physical 01' developmental factors. See 34 C.F.R. §300.304(b)(3). “Teclmically
sound instruments generally refers to assessments that have been shown through
research to be valid and reliable.” 34 C.F.R‘ § 300.304 Comments (2006).

The chosen assessments must be tailored to assess speciﬁc areas of educational need
of the child and not merely those that are designed to provide a single general
intelligence quotient. See 34 C.F.R. §300.304(b)(2).

Assessments must be selected and administered so as best to ensure that if an
assessment is administered to a child with impaired sensory, manual, 01‘ speaking
skills, the assessment results accurately reﬂect the child’s aptitude 01‘ achievement
level 01' whatever other factors the test purports to measure, rather than reﬂecting the
child’s impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills (unless those skills are the factors
that the test purpoﬁs to measure). 34 CFR. §300.304(c)(3).

The child should be assessed in all areas related to the suspected disability including,
if appropriate, health, vision, hearing, social and emotional status, general
intelligence, academic performance, communicative status, and motor abilities. 24
C.F.R. §300.304(4).

Applying the IDEA and COImecticut regulations cited above, this Hearing Ofﬁcer
ﬁnds that the Psychoeducational Evaluation was appropriate for the following
reasons, set forth below.

In compliance with the IDEA, an evaluation study of Student was conducted by
evaluators who were trained, knowledgeable and appropriately celtiﬁed and who
employed a variety of assessment tools and strategies to gather relevant functional,
developmental and academic information about the Student, including information
provided by the Parent to determine whether Student continued to be eligible for
special education services and to update Student‘s LEP. R.S.C.A. Sec 10-76—9(a), 34
C.F.R. §300.304(b)(4). (Findings ofFact No. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14).

No single measure or assessment was the sole criterion for determining eligibility for
special education services and the determination ot‘eligibility did not rest on an
intelligence quotient. The determination of continuing eligibility also took into
account factors such as Student’s functional physical, gross and ﬁne motor, medical
and developmental and Student’s present academic performance. 34 C.F.R.
§300.304(b)(l) and (2); 34 C.F.R. §300.304(c)(2) and (3). (Findings of Fact No. 7, 8,
1o, 12, 14)

The School Psychologist is an experienced professional who is a trained and
knowledgeable and appropriately certified or/licensed to conduct the general
intelligence tests. She administered the assessments in accordance with the test

10

June 30, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0473

producer’s instructions. 34 C.F.R. §300.304(c)(1)(iv) and (v). (Finding of Fact No. 9)

19. The testing instruments, WISC-IV, SB-S, CMS, Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales,
Comets 3, and Social Responsiveness Scale—Z are widely recognized as technically
sound instalments Although the Student has gross and ﬁne impairments, the School
Psychologist selected and administered the SB-S so as best to ensure that the
assessment is administered in a way that the results accurately reﬂect the Student’s
intelligence level. 34 C.F.R. §300.304 (b)(3) and 34 CFR. §300.304(c)(3) (Findings
ofFact No. 10, 12 and 28)

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:
1. The Board’s psychoeducational evaluation was appropriate.

2. The parents are not entitled to an IEE at public expense.

11

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬂﬁeen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4- 1 83, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Wm

Hé/ariné/Ofﬁcer Signature

Svlvia H0
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

