October 4, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0143

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Danbul‘y Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces ofJeimjfer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalt‘of the Board: Attorney Rebeeca Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103—1919

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2013-14 school year is
appropriate, designed to meet his individual academic and social needs, which contained
a sufﬁcient level of direct instruction, structure and intensity to meet those needs, and is
reasonably calculated to enable him to obtain educational beneﬁt,

2. 11‘ not, whether the placement 01‘ the Student at Easton Country Day School is appropriate
and shall be reimbursed.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

This hearing request was received by the Board on August 27, 2013, and a preheating conference
convened on September 6, 2013‘ At the preheating conference the attorneys for both parties
conﬁrmed that the parties would agree to mediate this case if they were unable to resolve the
matter through discussion between the attorneys.

The Parents” request for an extension 01‘ the mailing date of the decision was granted so that the
patties had sufﬁcient time to settle this case, and a hearing date of October 29, 2013 was
scheduled. Prior to the ﬁrst hearing date, the Pai'ents’ attorney submitted notiﬁcation that the
parties were in the process of ﬁnalizing a settlement agreement and requested that the case be
withdrawn without prejudice. Therefore, this matter is dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

[f the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hean’ng officer within ﬁﬁeen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals ﬁom the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either pany in accordance with the provisions of Section 4~183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬂ] /’3ﬂ / /’
x' . / / //
/ L l/ﬂ

 

Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

