January 17, 2014 Fina1 Decision and Order 14—0326

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Norwalk Board 01‘ Education v. Student
Appearing on behalfof the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michael McKeon
Pullman & Comley, LLC
90 State House Square
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esqt
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Were the evaluations conducted by the Norwalk Board of Education (“Board”)
and the subsequent denial of the Parent request for an Independent Educational
Evaluation (“IEE”) 0f the Student appropriate?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The request for a due process hearing was ﬁled by the Board on December 20, 2013, in
defense of the Board’s decision to deny a publicly funded IEE. The Hearing Ofﬁcer sent
conmlunication to the Patties in an attempt to schedule a prehearing conference. The
communication was sent via email to the Board, and by US. Postal Service, ﬁrst class,
prepaid, t0 the Parents on December 27, 2013. As of January 10, 2014 the Hearing
Ofﬁcer had not received any communications from the parties and so sent an email to
counsel for the Board requesting if the Parents had made contact with the Board. On
January 13, 2014, the Hearing Ofﬁcer received an email from the Board’s Special
Education and Student Sewices Administrator, in which it was stated that the Board was
formally withdrawing its request for a due process hearing as the Parties had come to a
resolution.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

As the Board has formally withdrawn the request for a due process hearing and with no
ﬁuther issues to be decided, this matter is DISMISSED.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for '
providing Special education for the student requim'ng special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁce: within ﬁﬁeen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or pr'escriptiozi of ﬁlm hearing ofﬁcsr.
Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing oﬁcer may be made to. state or federal

com by cithcrpany in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code I415(i)(2)(A)4 _ -

  

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

 

