December 30, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0315

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attorney Andrew D. O’Toole
100 Pearl Street, 14"1 Floor
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Susan C. Freedman
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

Parent Issues:
1. Did the West Hartford Board of Education (“Board”) improperly decide that the Student’s
behaviors were not a manifestation of the Student’s disability?
2. Did the Board fail to implement the Student’s individualized education program (“IEP”)?
3. Is the Board’s interim alternative education setting appropriate for this Student?

Board Issues:
1. Did the Parents voluntarily decline to allow the Student to receive special education
services prior to the incident in question?
2. If the answer to Board’s issue number 1 is YES, does the Hearing Ofﬁcer have jurisdiction
to hear this complaint?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parents, through counsel, filed this complaint on December 13, 2013. This was ﬁled as an
expedited hearing request. A preheating conference was held on December 18, 2013, from
which the above issues were identiﬁed. The expedited hearing date was set for January 21,
2014. The ﬁnal decision and order date was set for February 4, 2014. On December 23, 2013,
the Parents, through counsel, withdrew their expedited complaint without prejudice. The hearing
ofﬁcer clariﬁed that the request was for a complete withdrawal of the complaint and not a change
to a non—expedited status, to which counsel conﬁrmed that the withdrawal without prejudice was
a complete withdrawal.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

On December 23, 2013 the Parents withdrew, without prejudice, their request for an expedited
due process hearing. With no further issues to be decided, the matter is DISMISSED, without

prejudice.

If the local or regional board ofeducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for '

providing Special education for the student requiu'ng special education does not take

action on the ﬁndings or prescription of thc hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer

receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforcc the

f‘mch'ngs or pr’escriptioﬁ ofthe hearing ofﬁcer. ‘

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to. state or federal
the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut

court by cithcrpany in accordance with _
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code I415(1')(2)(A), '

@wﬂ Qeﬂ/Zépﬁu

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signahlrc

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

 

