March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Willington Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Courtney Spencer
Law Ofﬁce of Courtney Spencer, LLC
100 Riverview Center, Suite 290
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chinni & Meuser, LLC

One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F . Bird
Healing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education offer the Student a free appropriate public education between July 1,
2012 and Ju1y1, 2014?

2. If not, is the Student entitled to compensatory education in the form of the Board of Education’s
payment for an education program for the Student at Ben Bronz Academy for the 2014-2015 and
2015-2016 School Years, including extended year services for both years?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in this matter on July 1, 2014. This
Impattial Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case on July 1, 2014. A telephonic pre-hearing
conference was held on July 9, 2014. Attorney Courtney Spencer appeared on behalf of the Student and
Attorney Craig Meuser appeared on behalf of the Willington Board of Education (Board).

Evidentiary hearings were conducted on September 2, 3, 10, 26, October 10, 21, 22, November 7 and
December 17 and 18, 2014 and on Janueuy 8, 15, 16 and 30, 2015. The parties ﬁled briefs and replies in
March 2015, and the deadline for ﬁling the Final Decision and Order was extended to April 3, 2015.

The following witnesses testiﬁed: Student’s Mother, School Psychologist Mr. Rose, Director of Pupil
Personnel Services Ms. DiBeIla—McCarthy, Neuropsychologist Dr. Ciocca, Ben Bronz Education
Director Ms. Sharp, Case Manager and Special Education Teacher Ms. Wright, Speech Language
Therapist Ms. Frasinelli, Education Professor Dr. Cherkes-Julkowski, Mathematics Special Education
Teacher Ms. Hamilton, Science Teacher Ms. Rodriguez, Sixth Grade Teacher Mr. Kolleger and
Pediatrician Dr. Yencho.

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibits 1 through 5 were entered as full exhibits. Student Exhibits P-l through P—6f,
P-7 (except p. 6) through P-15, P-17 through P—20, P-22 through P-24 and P—28 were entered as full
exhibits. Finally, Board Exhibits B—l through B-55 were entered as full exhibits.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

T0 the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of
law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann F. v. Calallen Independent School
District, 835 F.Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993); SAS Institute Inc. v. H. Computer Systems, Inc, 605 F.Supp.
816 (M.D. Tenn. 1985).

SUMMARY:

A Student With a disability category of Speech and Language Impairment claimed that the program
provided by the Board of Education for her seventh and eighth grade years did not meet the legal
standards for a free appropriate public education. An independent audiologist evaluated the Student for
a possible auditory processing disorder and concluded that the disorder was present. The Audiologist
also found that the Student demonstrated signiﬁcant phonological weaknesses and recommended that
the Board implement, among other recommendations, intensive phonological training. The
phonological training was not implemented, negatively impacting the Student’s educational beneﬁt.
Additionally, the Board failed to address the Student’s school related anxiety and headaches. A remedy
of compensatory education in the form of payment for a private placement was awarded.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) Section 10~
76h and related regu1ations, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 20 United States
Code (U.S.C.) Sections 1400 et seq., and related regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform
Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. Sections 4-176e to 4-178 inclusive, Section 4—181a
and Section 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the panties, including documentary evidence and the
testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. The Student was born on December 29, 1999, and is now ﬁfteen years of age. She attended the
Board’s public elementaly and middle schools from her ﬁrst grade year, when her parents moved to
Willington, through the end of her eighth grade year, when she transitioned to Regional District 19’s
E.O. Smith High School in September 2014. A11 Willington students attend E.O. Smith High School
because Willington does not operate its own secondary school. (Testimony of Mother; DiBella-
McCarthy).

2. The Student was identiﬁed as eligibIe to receive special education and related services under
IDEA near the end of her third grade year, on March 17, 2009. Her identiﬁcation category was, and
continues to be, “Speech and Language Impairment”. (Exhibits B-4 and B-21; Mother; Frasinelli)

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

3. The Student has a classic language based leaming disability. At its root is a phonological deﬁcit
that undermines her ability to distinguish the sounds of speech and associate them with the letters and
words of written language. As a result, she has great difﬁculty with reading ﬂuency, spelling and
reading comprehension, and suffers ﬁ'om signiﬁcantly weak auditory working memory. (Cherkes-
Julkowskil) In addition to, 01' as a part of her language disability, the Student also displays a central
auditory processing disorder. (Exhibit B-9) Like many students with learning disabilities, the Student
also suffers from anxiety. (Exhibit P-20). She has also been diagnosed with Speciﬁc Learning
Disability Not Otherwise Speciﬁed, Reading Disorder, Disorder of Written Expression, Mathematics
Disorder, Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Speciﬁed (Exhibit P-4d; Ciocca) and Migraine. (Yencho)

4. The Student has consistently demonstrated an excellent work ethic and positive attitude at
school. She always works hard and tries her very best to do everything that her teachers ask of her. She
integrates well with her classmates, sometimes plays a leadership role among her peers, and gamers the
affection and good will of those around her. (Exhibit B-l, p. 5; Mother; Wright; Rodriguez; Frasinelli)

5. During her sixth grade year, the Student’s individualized education program (IEP) included
resource time for direct instruction in reading, pull out time for speech language therapy and eo-taught
classes for mathematics and language aits, for a total of 8.83 hours of IEP seivice per week. She was
educated with nondisabled peers for 31.17 hours out of the 35 hour week. (Exhibit B-1)

6. The Student’s sixth grade special education teacher used two data driven specialized reading
programs, Lexia and Read Naturally. She was successful with these programs, and her reading level
improved appropriately. She was reading independently at a sixth grade level by the end of that school
year. (Exhibit B-l; Kolleger)

7. The Student’s IEP in sixth grade included a signiﬁcant number of accommodations and
modiﬁcations, including among other things an FM System (to improve the clarity of auditory
infmmation and reduce ambient noise), a reader for tests as needed, extra time for tests, proj ects and
written work, test study guides, word banks, repetition of instinctions, notes and outlines and homework
review and models before leaving school. (Exhibit B-1)

8. The Student’s triennial evaluation was conducted toward the end of sixth grade. Academic
testing on the Test of Written Language produced average composite scores for Contrived Writing,
Spontaneous Writing and Overall Writing on February 2, 2012. She was Below Average on the subtests
for Vocabulary and Spelling, however. (Exhibit B—3)

9. Mathematics, as measured on the Keymath Revised NU, also reﬂected performance deﬁciencies.
She earned “Slightly Below Average” on the composite for Basic Concepts and an “Average” for
Operations. Her lowest areas, with Below Average subtest results, were Geometry and Mental
Computation. (Exhibit B—3)

1 Dr. Chei‘kes-Julkowski’s testimony concerning the Student’s disability was highly credible and
compelling. Dr. Cherkes—Iulkowski is an experienced special education professor. She did not formally
evaluate the Student or provide information to the PPT. The facts upon which she based her conclusions
were, however, available to the PPT when it made the relevant decisions.

3

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14—0572

10. The Board’s Speech Language Therapist, Ms. Frasinelh, conducted the Student’s speech
language evaluation on March 12, 2012. Frasinelli is an experienced and well-qua1iﬁed speech language
therapist. The Student scored in the low average range on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test and in
the average range on the Expressive Vocabulary Test. On the Clinical Evaluation of Language
Fundamentals, Fourth Edition, she had “Signiﬁcantly Below Average” 0n the composites for Core
Language, Expressive Language Index, Language Memory Index and Working Memory. Her scores on
the Receptive Language Index and the Language Content Index were only “Below Average”. Her
weakest areas on the subtests were Recalling Sentences, Number Repetition Total and F amiliar
Sequences, Which were in the “Signiﬁcantly Below Average” range. (Exhibit B-4)

11. On The Word Test 2 to assess expressive language and semantics, the Student scored “Below
Average” on the total test, with “Signiﬁcantly Below Average” scores on the Flexible Word Use and
Synonym subtests. (Exhibit B-4)

12. On a screening test for centra1 auditory processing disorder, SCAN-A, the Student’s scores were
in the “disordered” and “questionable” range, and “considerably lower than when last tested” indicating
that her auditory system was developing at a s1ower rate than her peers. (Exhibit B—4)

13. Ms. Frasinelli concluded that the Student continued to exhibit a language based learning disorder
and required ongoing language therapy to improve expressive language, memory and processing skills.
Additionally, Ms. FrasinelIi recommended an outside assessment2 to further exp10re the possibihty of a
central auditory processing disorder. (Exhibit B—4)

14. School Psychologist, Mr. Rose, also an experienced and well—qualiﬁed school psychologist,
conducted a cognitive evaluation for the triennial review. He used the Woodcock—Johnson Tests of
Cognitive Abi1ity III, and placed the Student’s intellectual quotient (IQ) in the Average range. He found
that the Student had relative strengths in the areas of Auditory Processing and Fluid Reasoning as well
as Visual Processing and Visual Memory skiHs. Her relative weaknesses were in the areas of Short
Term Memory and Working Memory for auditory information. (Exhibit B-6)

15. The Student took the sixth grade Connecticut Mastery Test (CMT) Modiﬁed Assessment System
(MAS) for reading and mathematics in March 2012. (Exhibit B—10) The CMT MAS was an alternative
version of the CMT (Connecticut’s then State mandated standardized test) that was administered to
students with disabilities who were not able to perform at grade level, even With the accommodations
and modiﬁcations allowed with the standard CMT, such as extra time, a reader for instructions, and
larger print. (See Exhibits B—23, B-29 and B-35; DiBella-McCarthy)

16. By using the CMT MAS for the Student in reading and mathematics, the Board in effect
acknowledged that the Student was not able to perform at grade level, even with accommodations and
modiﬁcations, in reading and mathematics.

17. Also signiﬁcant was that although the CMT MAS in reading and mathematics were designed to
test the same subjects as the standard version, it provided a number of accommodations and

2 Karen Pollock conducted such an assessment in June 2012. (Exhibit B—9) Pollock is an independent
audiologist who is acknowledged to be an expert in her ﬁeld. (Frasinelli)

4

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

modiﬁcations that rendered the test markedly less challenging than the standard version. For instance,
the CMT MAS for reading had fewer and shorter reading passages and fewer questions with fewer
answer options, as well as larger type and wider margins, than the standard version. The CMT MAS for
mathematics had simpler text, shmter sentences, simpler numbers, simpler equations, simpler diagrams
and tables, impoﬁant words in bold, and even deleted entire strands. (Exhibit B—35; Cherkes-Julkowski)

18. The Student’s performance on the CMT MAS in sixth and then seventh grade, therefore, did not
demonstrate that her performance in reading or mathematics was comparable to nondisabled peers or
that it was “on grade level’i

19. The Student did, however, also take the standard CMT for writing (with permitted
accommodations and modiﬁcations) in the sixth grade and scored in the Proﬁcient range. (Exhibit B-
10)

20. At the Student’s annual review in sixth grade on April 12, 2012, the PPT described her
performance as “at an independent 6‘h grade reading level” with “[ﬂluency . . . at 115 wpm at the 6th
grade level.” The PPT also said that she “is very capable of producing basic grammatically correct
sentences and paragraphs at grade level . . . and her ability to construct complex logical sentences is
average.” (Exhibit 13—7; Kolleger)

21. The PPT also reported that the Student struggled with mathematics word problems that
incorporate extraneous information, but can “follow a process for solving math problems” and that
multiplication and division are areas of strength for her. (Exhibit B-7; Wright)

22. In the area of communication, the PPT noted “signiﬁcant gains (11—20 pts) on standardized
language measures” but that overall skills were still below average, particularly memory and higher-
level language processing. Her “short-term and working memory, higher-level language processing
[and] auditory processing” were all described as areas of continuing concern. (Exhibit B-7)

23. The PPT developed goals and objectives for the Student’s seventh grade in the areas of writing
and mathematics computation as well as in the area of communication with a focus on reading
comprehension. (Exhibit B-7)

24. The plan for the Student, as initially contemplated for the seventh grade, provided for 3.17 IEP
hours per week, a substantial decline from the 8.83 hours per week in her sixth grade IEP. (Exhibits B—1
and B-7) She was to be educated with nondisabled peers for 31.83 hours out of 35 hours each week.
(Exhibit B—7)

25. The Student’s planned seventh grade service grid consisted of .5 hours per week of speech
language therapy individually or in a small group and 1.33 hours per week for language arts instruction
in the resource room and 1.33 hours per week for mathematics instruction in the resource room.

26. On June 26, 2012 after the school summer recess began, the independent audiologist who was
selected jointly by the Student’s parents and the Board, assessed the Student. (DiBella—McCaﬁhy)
Pollock submitted a report of her assessment on June 28, 2012. (Exhibit B—9) Pollock concluded that
the Student exhibits a “signiﬁcant degree of inefﬁciency and/or immaturity of her central auditoly

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14—0572

system” With paiticular weaknesses in the areas of “phenemic decoding (speech discrimination),
tolerance-fading memory (auditory attention/memory/ﬂgure-ground), and organizational weaknesses.”
(Exhibit B-9)

27. Pollock explained that the Student’s signiﬁcant phonological weakness means that she has
difﬁculty discriminating speech sounds quickly and accurately. Students with this proﬁle “often miss 01'
mishear what has been said” contributing to “problems with reading and spelling.” Further testing of
phonemic decoding also revealed that the Student is deﬁcient in her “ability to blend phonemic elements
(sounds) into words.” (Exhibit B-9)

28. In addition, the Student’s “well below average” score on the Elision Subtest of the
Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing revealed an inability to repeat a word and say what is
left after dropping out designated sounds. Her score on the Phonological Memory subtest demonstrated
a weakness in phonological memory, a concern that can impact the ability to learn new vocabulary.
(Exhibit B-9) Also of note was the Student’s below grade level performance on the Lindamood
Auditory Conceptualization Test, which looks at the “ability to judge the sameness and difference in
auditory patterns” and “sounds in spoken patterns.” (Exhibit B-9)

29. Pollock concluded by identifying the Student’s phonological awareness and auditory memory as
relative weaknesses. She recommended that the Student receive “intensive training to improve her
phonological skills” as part of her reading and/or speech language program. She added that the student
should also continue to receive the auditory memmy training that was part of her program in the sixth
grade. (Exhibit 13-9)

30. In addition to intensive phonological training, Pollock recommended the use of an FM system
and listed a number of other accommodations and modiﬁcations for the Student’s school program,
including preferential seating, cues before giving directions, repeating and segmenting directions,
providing visual examples, teaching strategies for recalling content, advance notice oftests, extended
time for tests, study guides and exemption from foreign language class. (Exhibit B-9) Many of these
suggestions, including the FM system, had already been incorporated into the program.

31. The Student’s PPT met shortly after the school year opened, on September 25, 2012, to discuss
the Pollock repoit and modify the Student’s 1EP in its light. Although the PPT purported to accept and
incoiporate all of Pollock’s ﬁndings and conclusions, her recommendation for intense phonological
training was neither included in the IEP nor ever implemented. (Exhibit B-12; Wright; Frasinelli)
While Speech Language Therapist Frasinelli disagreed with the recommendation for intensive
phonological training, her disagreement was not noted in the 1EP as an “action refused” or otherwise.
(Frasinelli; Exhibit B-12)

32. The Student’s mother repoited her concern that the Student is “petriﬁed of being called on
without warning in class” and spent enormous amounts of time with homework each evening. She said
that the Student “often has difﬁculty recalling homework directions once at home.” The mother also
expressed concem that “the test scores do not represent what [the Student] knows at any point in time
due to her memory and recall difﬁculties.” (Exhibit B—12)

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

33. In response to the parent’s concern about homework, the PPT added a description of the
Student’s performance in the area of completing homework assignments to the IEP as well as a new goal
and obj ectives in the area of organization of assignments. The PPT also made minor adjustments to the
Student’s goals and objectives in writing and communication. In addition, the goal and objectives for
mathematics computation was dropped because the mathematics teacher felt her computational skills
were adequate. (Wright; Exhibit B-12)

34. The Student’s speech language therapy was increased from .5 hours per week to 1 hour per
week, and she was placed in a co-taught language arts class with both a special education teacher and a
regular education teacher for 6.67 hours per week. She had resource room time, previously described as
for instinction in language arts and mathematics but now described as resource room time for “academic
suppoft” of 1.33 hours per week and another 1.33 hours per week for “language arts support”. Finally,
she had .83 hours per week for organizational support for homework in the resource room. (Exhibit B—
12)

35. In total> the Student was now to receive special education and related services for 11.17 hours
each week, a signiﬁcant increase from the 3.17 hours per week originally planned for her seventh grade.
She was to be educated with nondisabled peers for 30.50 hours out of 35 hours each week. (Exhibit B—
12). Modest changes were also made to the Student’s list of accommodations and modiﬁcations.3

36. The Student’s new seventh grade program (and later, her eighth grade program) reﬂected a
fundamental shift away from direct instruction in reading and language in the elementary school toward

3 The Student’s Page 8 accommodations and modiﬁcations were now as follows:
Materials/Books/Equipment: Calculator
Assistive Technology: FM System
Tests/Quizzes/Assessments: Reader for Tests as needed, Reader for Tests as needed, Extra Time-
Tests/Projects/Written Work, Alternate test setting, Alternative tests based on main idea, N0 spelling
penalty, Preview Test Procedures, Prior Notice of Tests, Shortened tasks, Test Study Guide, Word
Banks
Grading: No Spelling Penalty
Organization: Daily Assign/Planner Checked by Staff, Visual cues/models, Graphic Organizers, List
Sequential Steps, Post Assignments, Provide Study Outlines, Templates for Written Work
Environment: Optimize auditory environment, Minimize auditory and visual stimulation, Preferential
Seating
Behavioral Interventions and Support: Positive Reinforcement
Instructional Strategies: Scaffolding, Repeat Instructions, Editing Checklist, Check Work in Progress,
Concrete Examples, Cueing/Prompts, Extra Drills/Practice, Have Student Restate Information, Models,
Modiﬁed content, Monitoring assignments, Personalized Examples, Provide Models, Provide
Notes/Outline to Student, Provide Student With Vocabulary Word Bank, Review Directions, Review
Sessions, Suppoﬁ Auditory Presentations with Visuals, Use Mnemonics
Other: Check for understanding. Allow processing time. Modiﬁed HW length. Review HW assgnmts
and provide an example to take home. Allow to add orally to completed tests. OnIy call on in class if
hand is raised or she is prepared to answer. Periodic review of content.
(Exhibit B—IZ)

 

March 31, 2015 _ Final Decision and Order 14—0572

an emphasis in the middle school on applying learned skills to work in the mainstream curriculum.
(Wright; Frasinelli).

37. Accordingly, rather than the daily direct instruction with a specialized reading program she had
in the sixth grade, the Student’s seventh grade resource time for language arts and speech language
therapy4 was largely devoted to academic course work that involved reading comprehension and writing.
(Wright; Exhibit B—13)

38. The Student’s PPT met again on November 27, 2012. This time, the parents brought an advocate
with them. (Exhibit B-14)

39. The Student’s parents expressed a variety of concerns during the meeting, including but not
limited to a speciﬁc request to add intensive phonological training to the program as recommended by
Pollock and a request to return to use of an auditory memory training program also suggested by
Pollock. (Exhibit B-l4)

40. The PPT agreed to reintroduce an auditory training program as was used in earlier years, and
soon thereafter Ms. Frasinelli began working with the Student on an automated memory training
program known as “HearBuilder.” (Frasinelli; Exhibit B-1 1)

41. At the meeting on November 27, 2012, the parents asked the Board to conduct weekly core
meetings, which were meetings with the teaching team and service providers. The PPT readily agreed to
do so. (Exhibit B-l4) At some point thereafter, however, the Student’s mother told the case manager
that she preferred to communicate withe-mail and did not want to attend meetings. (Wright; Mother)
The core meetings were not held. (Mother)

42. Again, the PPT did not introduce intensive phonological training to the IEP. Again, the PPT did
not report its disagreement with the recommendation for intensive phonological training as an “action
refused” or otherwise in the IEP. Nor did it identify phonological awareness or reading ﬂuency as an
area of concem 01' include any goals or objectives in the area of phonological awareness, reading ﬂuency
0r spelling despite Pollock’s suggestion that these are typical areas of weakness for students with
phonological weakness. (Exhibits B-9 and B-14)

43. Students who, like the Student here, have poor phonological skills inevitably also experience
difﬁculty with reading ﬂuency and comprehension, as well as auditory working memory. An inability
to decode accurately and rapidly, negatively impacts reading comprehension and thereby undeimines
academic performance in Virtually all areas. (Exhibit B-9; Cherkes-Julkowski) In addition, speciﬁc
learning disorders commonly co-occur with mental disorders such as anxiety disorder. (Exhibit P-20)

44. The PPT did slightly modify the Student’s goals and objectives for the seventh grade. The initial
goals and objectives in the areas of writing, organization and communication were maintained as
initially written. New goals and objectives for mathematics word problems, reading comprehension and

4 Special Education Teacher Wright, also an experienced and well qualiﬁed professional, testiﬁed that
she used two specialized reading programs with the Student in early seventh grade but not on a daily
basis 01' for more than 15 01' 20 minutes at a time. (Wright)

8

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

note taking were added. A new goal and objectives in communication — for auditory memory training —
was also added. (Exhibit B-14)

45. The Student’s speech language therapy, co-taught class for language arts and time for
organizational suppmt were not changed. Her time for language arts support in the resource room,
however, was increased from 1.33 hours per week to 2.5 hours per 6 day cycle. A new block of time
was added for speech language “intervention” (auditory memory training) of 1.33 hours per six day
cycle. One hour per 6 day cycle was added for mathematics suppOIt in the resource room and 1.33
hours per six day cycle was added for study skills instruction in the resource room. (Exhibit B—14)

46. These changes brought the Student’ 3 IEP sewices up to about 13. 33 hours p61 week, what
appeais to be a modest merease ovei the 11. 17 hours per week5 in the earlier IEP. (Exhibit B- 14)

47. The Student’s accommodations and modiﬁcations were unchanged with the exception that the
following was added: “Case mgr. Repo1t prog. 1x wk”. (Exhibit B-14) Despite the notation, this item
was not implemented with ﬁdelity. (Mother)

48. The PPT met again on March 21, 2013 for its annual review. (Exhibit B- 18) The PPT reported
that the Student mastered all of he1 academic goals and both of her language6 goals (See also Exhibit
B 15) She was “reading and comprehending on grade level ” In addition, the Team reported that the
Student’s self—advocacy skills and conﬁdence increased during the year and that she was making
satisfactory progress with her auditory training program. The Student’s behavior was excellent and her
accommodations were working well for her. (Exhibit B-18)

49. The PPT reported the Student’s present levels of perfonnance in language alts as follows:

DRA7-Ora1 read ﬂuency — Independent Gr.7, Comprehension ~ Independent Gr.7, Current
Ave. 88%, Final Persuasive essay — (82/96) 85%, Feb Prompt 6/12

(Exhibit 3-1 8)

50. For mathematics, the Student’s level ofperformance was described only in terms of her class
grade: “Current Ave. 95%, Dec/fract/% test 62/60”. In the area of communication, the level of

performance was:

5 The record allows only an approximation of these ﬁgures because some segments of IEP sewiee time
are described with a frequency of hours per 6 day cycle, while others are described in hours per week.

6 In fact, the Student’s progress repo1t at the same time indicated that she was making satisfactory
progress with, but had not yet mastered, one of her communication goals, her work with the HearBuilder
auditory training program. (Exhibit B—15)

7 The reliability of the DRA as a standardized test is controversial. (Ciocca; Cherkes-Julkowski;
Kolleger) As Mr. Kolleger testiﬁed, the DRA allows the Student to look back at the text, and is not a
very demanding assessment. (Kolleger) The law and the State Department of Education at one time
required priority school districts to use the DRAZ for all students in Kindergarten through Grade 3.

(Stipulation)

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

[The Student] mastered her language goal of using mem01y and comprehension
strategies with support. She is making satisfactory progress with an auditory memory
skills software program

(Exhibit B-18)

51. The PPT developed a goal and objectives for the Student in reading comprehension, with an
objective to achieve a reading rate of 115 words per minute on the DRA, writing and mathematics word
problems as well as a goal and objectives in the area of communication. (Exhibit B-18)

52. The new IEP for the eighth grade used co-taught classes for language arts and now mathematics.
In addition, the PPT offered a summer program for four weeks, to include two hours for reading and
three hours per week for mathematics and writing with special goals and objectives. (Exhibit B-18)

53. In total, the eighth grade IEP provided services for 15 hours out of 35 hours each week, another
modest increase over the previous IEP. The Student was to be educated with nondisabled peers for 30
hours out of 35 hours each week. Her accommodations and modiﬁcations were not changed. (Exhibit
B-1 8)

54. In March 2013, the Student took the seventh grade CMT. Again, she took the CMT MAS for
mathematics and reading and scored in the Goal range for each. She scored in the Proﬁcient range on
the standard CMT in writing. (Exhibit B-20)

55. A few weeks into the Student’s eighth grade year, the PPT met again on October 2, 2013. The
Student’s accommodations and modiﬁcations were adjusted by adding the following items:

Preferential seating with access to resources, access to support personnel, Break down lengthy
assignments, Review Sessions, Provide hard copy of a11notes — not taking notes on iPad (unless
student chooses) m During direct instinction [the Student] should be listening and processing
which is difﬁcult while copying notes from board; provide a homework model or example to
take home for reference;_Incorporate a non—verbal cueing system in math to determine
comprehension of content; Needs positive/encouraging approach to supp01t; No late penalty for
incomplete math homework when completed after additional instruction

(Exhibit 13—21)

56. Between the beginning of the eighth grade school year and the end of J anuary 2014, the Student
Visited the school nurse complaining of headaches 0n fouiteen occasions. This was a signiﬁcant
increase from such visits in the seventh grade.8 (Exhibit P-12) The nurse typically gave her an over the
counter pain killer and made a note for the record. The visits stopped in January 2014 because the pain
killer was no longer effective. (Mother)

8 There were only four such Visits during the entire seventh grade. (Exhibit P-12) In her ﬁfth grade
year the Student’s PPT noted that “[s]ometimes she appears to experience some anxiety” and “had some
headaches at the beginning of the school year.” (Exhibit B-1)

10

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

57. The Student was seen by her pediatrician for the problem and he concluded the headaches were
caused by stress and anxiety about academic demands at school. (Yencho) The Student’s mother
reported the headaches and the pediatrician’s view to the school, and asked for help. (Mother; Wright;
Exhibits B—40 and P-7) A meeting was arranged with the school psychologist, who worked with the
Student on strategies to reduce her anxiety. (Rose; Wright) Although the headaches seemed to improve
at timesg, they inevitably returned and continued to plague the Student for much, if not most, of the
eighth grade. (Mother; Exhibit P-11)

58. By October 2013, the Student stopped using the HearBuilder auditory training program because
she was not able to progress any further in it. (Frasinelli; Exhibit B-23) She did master two out of the
ﬁve components of the program before quitting. (Exhibit P-l 1)

59. In December 2013, the Student unilaterally began attending regular education Uniﬁed Arts
classes in Health and Computers during part of the school day that was scheduled for the auditory
training program and academic support in the resource room. Her parents supported this decision
because they hoped it would alleviate some of her anxiety. (Mother; DiBella—McCarthy; Exhibit B-29)

60. An extended discussion took place between the Board’s Pupil Services Director and the
Student’s patents regarding various alternative ways to provide the special education and related
services identiﬁed in the Student’s IEP while the Student also attended Uniﬁed Arts classes in the
regular education setting. The parents insisted that the Student continue to receive the full amount of
IEP service time, while also adding the two Uniﬁed Arts classes, but there were not enough hours in the
school day to satisfy that request. (Exhibits B-25, B-26, B~38 and B-39; DiBella—McCarthy; Wright;
Mother)

61. The Board offered to provide some services before and/or after school or during pait of the time
otherwise devoted to the Uniﬁed Arts classes, in an unsuccessful but good faith effort to satisfy the
parents’ request. (Exhibits B—25, B—26 and B-29; DiBella-McCarthy)

62. In the meantime, Ms. Frasinelli cut back on her time with the Student under the mistaken belief
that the IEP had been revised. She made up at least some of that time when she learned of the mistake.

63. On F ebruary 11, 2014, the PPT met again to discuss how to revise the IEP to allow for the
Student’s attendance in the Uniﬁed Arts classes. (Exhibit B—29) The Student’s parents brought a
different advocate with them to this meeting, and the Student also attended. At the meeting, the PPT
again reported that the Student “is meeting all grade level expectations.” (Exhibit B-29)

64. A decision was made to reduce the Student’s speech language time by one session per week and
to eliminate the Student’s goal and objectives in the area of communication going forward. This change,
which reduced speech'language service from 1.33 hours per 6 day cycle to .67 hours per 6 day cycle
only paitially addressed the problem that the schedule still did not provide the full time written in the
IEP. (Exhibit B-29) In the end, the school shifted some sewice time from one service model to another

9 The Student’s mother sometimes described her daughter as “carefree” or “happy” and shared that on
some days her daughter did not have a headache. (Exhibit P—7)

11

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

in order to partially accommodate the impasse. This solution, however, still left the Student with fewer
service hours than stipulated in her IEP for a period of time. (McCai’thy-DiBella; Exhibit B-25)

65. The school staff felt that the advocate was hostile and aggiessive at the February 11,2014
meeting (DiBella—McCaIthy) 111 any event, the discussion g1 ew acrimonioous and the meeting broke up
with the parents’ announcement that they intended to ﬁle for due process.1 0(DiBella-McCaIthy)

66. The PPT did not meet again for the next annual review until May 2, 2014 because the parties
agreed to await the report of a neuropsychological evaluation that had been commissioned by the
Student’s parents from Dr. Cristina Ciocca. Dr. Ciocca is an experienced and well qualiﬁed
nem‘opsychologist in private practice. (Exhibit B-31; Ciocca; DiBella—McCarthy)

67. D1: Ciocea reviewed the Student’s records as provided by her parents, interviewed the Student
and her mother, administered various tests on three separate dates in January and February 2014, and
observed the Student in school on March 28, 2014. She issued her report shortly before the May 2, 2014
PPT meeting. (Exhibit P—4d; Ciocca)

68. Dr. Ciocca used the Wechsler Intelligence Test for Children — Fourth Edition to evaluate the
Student’s cognitive functioning, and she obtained scores that were “largely comparable to those obtained
in prior assessments.” The Student’s Full Scale IQ was 84 and Below Average but “suppressed by her
statistically weaker Working Memory Index.” (Exhibit P-4d) Dr. Ciocca obsewed that the Student’s
Verbal Comprehension was weaker than Perceptual Reasoning and that Perceptual Reasoning and
Processing Speed Indices were Average. (Exhibit P—4d)

69. The Student’s Working Memory Index was her weakest area and in the Borderline range.
(Exhibit P-4d) She demonstrated weaknesses in all language—based domains, including verbal ﬂuency
and vocabulary. She had even greater difﬁculty with audit01y processing and receptive language. “She
incorrectly took in auditory stimuli precluding the efﬁcacy of her responding.” (Exhibit P-4d).

70. D1: Ciocca tested the Student’s academic achievement using the Wechsler Individual
Achievement Test ~ Third Edition. The Student’s composite scores for Total Reading, Basic Reading,
Reading Comprehension & Fluency, Written Expression and Math Fluency were all in the Below
Average range, with percentile ranks ranging from 9 to 16. She had “substantial difficulty” responding
to reading comprehension questions even with the possibility of reviewing the passage. Only her score
on the Mathematics Composite was in the Average range.

71. The Student’ s some on the subtest f01 Reading Comp1ehension was at the pe1centile rank of 10
and grade level equivalency of 2 3. Her Word Rlelading subtest was at a percentile rank of 9 and a grade
level equivalency of 4.5. Pseudowo1d Decodingll was also low, with a percentile iank of 16 and a grade
level equivalency of 3. 4. (Exhibit P— 4d)

10 Although the Board agreed to pay for an independent speech and language evaluation at that meeting,
neither side followed up and it was never arranged. The Student does not claim here that failure to
Fuisue that evaluation violated the Student 5 r.ights (Exhibit B- 29)

I Pseudoword decoding is highly correlated with reading comprehension. (Che1kes- -Ju1kowski)

12

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

72. The Student’s Oral Reading Accuracy score had a percentile rank of 3 and a grade level
equivalency of 3.0. Although her reading rate was average, her accuracy was much poorer. She “made
numerous variations When reading the text. Some words were clear approximations while others were
words that did not even make sense within the context of the passage.” (Exhibit P-4d)

73. The Student scored similarly poorly on the Gray Oral Reading Test, where her score was in the
Borderline Range. (Exhibit P-4d)

74. These low achievement scores came as a shock to the Student’s parents, who had been told
repeatedly that their daughter was “on grade level” in her academic subj ects. (Mother)

75. Dr, Ciocca also administered psychological functioning tests. She found that the Student
exhibits an “anxious conformity to the expectation of others . . . as well as an overcontrol of emerging
impulses and a defensiveness about admitting psychological problems.” Additionally, Dr. Ciocca noted
that “[s]he experiences a chronic state of tension, often manifested in functional somatic disorders (such
as headaches), due to her pervasive worry about performance and producing acceptable work.” (Exhibit

P-4d)

' 76. Dr. Ciocca applied the following diagnoses to the Student:

1. Mixed Receptive and Expressive Language Disorder (Language-Based Learning
Disability)

2. Auditory Processing Disorder

3. Speciﬁc Learning Disability Not Otherwise Speciﬁed (Executive Dysfunction, Working

Memory, Memory Retrieval and Nonverbal Processing Deﬁcits)
Reading Disorder (Dyslexia)

Disorder of Written Expression (Dysgraphia)

Mathematics Disorder (Dyscalculia)

Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Speciﬁed.

S.O‘P'ﬁ>

(Exhibit P-4d)

77. Dr. Ciocca also made forty separate recommendations, thirty—eight for school and two for home.
Among these recommendations were that the “pace of the classroom must be closely regulated and the
mode of content exposure varied from traditional curriculum/pace to match her processing needs” and
that the Student must have “daily, systematic, scientiﬁcally-based reading and writing instructional
programming.” For the parents, Dr. Ciocca recommended that they obtain individual psychotherapy and
monitor the headaches. (Exhibit P-4d)

78. On May 2, 2014, the PPT reviewed Dr. Ciocca’s report. Board staff expressed disagreement
with Dr. Ciocca’s assessment of the Student’s academic achievement. The school staff reported that the
Student mastered all of her IEP goals and that she Was earning As and Bs in all of her classes. Board
staff insisted that the Student was “meeting grade level expectations in math and [language arts] with
support and her IEP accommodations.” (Wright; Exhibits B-31 and B-34)

l3

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

79. Board staff took the position that an appropriate program for the Student could be provided by
Regional District 19 in the local public secondary school, E.O. Smith High School. Board staff also
submitted that most of Dr. Ciocca’s recommendations were already pan of the Student’s program and
that others cou1d be included12 easily without substantially changing the proposed IEP for ninth grade.
(Wright; Exhibit B-31)

80. The Board members of the PPT recommended an IEP for the Student’s ninth grade school year
as we11 as a summer program of 4 hours per week for 5 weeks. (Exhibit B-31) The proposed IEP was
very similar to the Student’s program in seventh and eighth grades. It included a combination of co-
taught classes and resource room for sma11 group or individual support and speech language therapy.
Contrary to its trend in the middle school to increase service time, however, the PPT recommended a
steep reduction in total IEP service time down to 6.73‘3 hours out of 33.33 hours per week. The
proposed IEP included 26.62 hours per week of education with nondisabled peers. (Exhibit B-31)

81. The PPT noted the parents’ concern about the Student’s “level of independence with her
academic skills, the level of support provided through various page 8 accommodations and [her]
reported level of anxiety regarding her academic program.” (Exhibit B-31)

82. The Student’s level of performance in the area of language arts was described as:

DRA — Oral read ﬂuency ~ Grade 8 e 102 wpm/96% accuracy, Comprehension 2 G128, Term 1-
88%, Term 2—84%, Term 3 ~ currently 77%

(Exhibit 13-31)

83. The Student’s 1eve1 ofperformance in the area of mathematics was again described in terms of
her class grades: “Tennl — 97%, Term2 ~ 85%, Term3 - currently 87.” (Exhibit B-31)

84. Her level of performance in communication was:

In therapy setting: increased independence in using strategies and verbalizing reasoning; needs
modeling/scaffolding with abstract concepts, improvement in reading comp, written responses

(Exhibit 3-3 1)

85. There was no mention in the IEP 0f the Student’s many nursing visits, anxiety or headaches.
There was no recommendation for an evaluation or investigation of the problem. And, a1th0ugh the
school psychologist informally counseled the Student on stress reduction, the IEP never identiﬁed this as
an area of disability, added goals or objectives, or provided services for anxiety or headaches. (Exhibit

13-31)

12 For instance, the PPT adopted the recommendation for an evaluation of Assistive Technology needs
for the Student. That evaluation was not completed until after the summer recess began. (Exhibit B-32)
13 The sewice grid erroneously identiﬁes the specialized service and instruction time as only 4.20 hours
per week and the time with non—disabled peers as 29.83 hours per week (Exhibit B—3 1).

14

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14—0572

86. At the May 2, 2014 meeting, the Student’s parents requested that the Board place the Student at
Ben Bronz Academy, a privately operated approved special education school located in West Hartford.
Ben Bronz Academy is a small school that focuses on educating students with learning disabilities,
language based learning disorders, Attention Deﬁcit Disorder and Asperger’s Syndrome. It offers a
“language rich environment” with teachers who are skilled in facilitating the development of receptive
and expressive language skills in their students. It provides intensive remedial programming to address
reading disorders, including phonological weaknesses. Class sizes range from 4 to 7 students, so that
instructional pace can be specially individualized for each student at the most fundamental level, and
auditory and other distractions can be minimized. (Sharp)

871 The Board of Education rejected the parent’s request even though accepting it would not have
been at the Board’s ﬁnancial expense (see Finding of Fact N0. 1, above). The Board staff argues that
the proposed placement is too restrictive for the Student, pointing out that the Student enjoys and
beneﬁts from interaction with non—disabled peers. (DiBella—McCarthy; Wright; Frasinelli; Kolleger;
Rodriguez)

88. The Student passed all of her seventh and eighth grade courses with As and Bs. (B—34) There
were, however, many low marks on individual tests and quizzes. (Rodriguez; Exhibit B—27) Moreover,
the Student had the beneﬁt of a great many accommodations and modiﬁcations during her seventh and
eighth grades years as well as an increasingly substantial amount of support from her special education
and service team (Wright; Exhibits B-12; B-14; B—18; B—21; B-29 and B—3 1) The course grades,
therefore, are not compelling evidence of her academic performance.

89. The school team also assessed the Student using the STAR and the DRA in seventh and eighth
grade. She did not, however, achieve expected performance levels with these instruments.
Signiﬁcantly, the Student’s reading rate actually declined from 115 words per minute at the end of sixth
grade to 102 words per minute at the end of eighth grade. (Exhibits B-5, B-7, B-27 and B-31) Nor did
the Student meet her goals for math and reading on the STAR assessment. (Exhibits B-27 and 8-55)

90. Over the course of the Student’s seventh and eighth grade years, the school staff met with the
parents informally several times and engaged in very frequent e-mail communication. (Mother; Wright;
Exhibits P—7; P—9; B-23; B—24', B—38, B-39 and B—40) In addition, the Board conducted six formal PPT
meetings over the two years, and the board’s highest level administrator for special education, Holly
DiBella—McCaithy personally attended each one. (Exhibits B-12, B-14, B—18, B-21, B-29, and B-31)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1. In Board of Education v. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982)(R0wley), the United States Supreme
Court set out a two-part test for determining whether a local board of education has offered a student a
free appropriate public education (FAPE) in compliance with the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act, 20 U.S.C. Sections 1400 et seq (IDEA). The ﬁrst pan is whether there has been compliance with
the procedural requirements of IDEA; and the second part is whether the student’s IEP is reasonably
calculated to enable the student to receive educational beneﬁts. Id, at 206-207.

2. The Board had the burden in this case to prove that its lEPs were appropriate and therefore in
compliance with IDEA by a preponderance of the evidence. Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies

15

 

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

(R.S.C.A.) Section 10—76h—14(a).

3. The ﬁrst prong of the Rowley inquiiy, whether the Board complied with IDEA’s procedural
mandates, is critical. As the Supreme Court said in Rowley, Congress' insistence, in IDEA’s procedural
scheme, "upon full participation of concerned parties throughout the development of the IEP" reﬂects a
"conviction that adequate compliance with the procedures prescribed would in most cases assure much
if not all of what Congress wished in the way of substantive content in an IEP.“ Rowley at 206.

4. The procedural requirements of IDEA are designed to guarantee that the education of each
student with a disability is individually tailored to meet the student's unique needs and abilities and to
safeguard against arbitrary or erroneous decision—making. 20 U.S.C. Sections 1412(1) and 1415(a)—(e);
Daniel RR, v. State Board of Education, 874 F.2d 1036, 1039, and 1041 (5th Cir. 1989). Signiﬁcantly,
compliance with IDEA's procedural requirements is the responsibility of the board of education, and not
the parents. Uniﬁed School District No. 1 v. Department of Education, 64 Conn. App. 273= 285 (2001).

5. IDEA proscribes a process by which each student’s IEP must be developed and what it must
contain. The IEP is the “key operative feature of the Federal Act." David D. v. Dartmouth School
Committee, 775 F.2d 411, 415 (1st Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 475 US. 1140 (1986). First, a ”full and
individual evaluation" of the child‘s educational needs must be conducted before any decisions about a
student’s program can be made. 34 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section 300.301. In this
regard, boards must "use a variety of assessment tools and strategies to gather relevant functional,
developmental, and academic information" about the student. 34 C.F.R. Section 300.304. The
information derived from the evaluation is used to determine the content of the student’s IEP, which in
turn is designed to promote the child’s access to educational beneﬁt and progress in the general
curriculum. 20 U.S.C. Section 1414(b)(2)(A).

6. A comerstone 0f IDEA’s procedural scheme is that students must be assessed "in all areas of
suspected disabi1ity" so as to garner the information necessary to identify the student’s educational
needs and develop his or her program. 20 U.S.C. Section 1414(b)(3); 34 C.F.R. Section 300.304(e)(4).

7. Each IEP must include a statement of the student's present level of performance in each area of
disability, a statement of measurable annual goals, inc1uding academic and functional goals, that are
designed to meet each of the child's educational needs resulting from the disability, and a statement of
the special education and related sewices to be provided in order to enable the child to attain the goals
and progress in the general education curriculum. 20 U.S.C. Section 1414(d)(1)(A); 34 C.F.R. Section
300.320.

8. Boards of education must involve the student’s parents in each step of the process. IDEA’S
procedural safeguards protect the right of parents to participate in 2111 decision-making meetings (34
C.F.R. Section 300.501(b)), the right of parental involvement in placement decisions (34 C.F.R. Section
300.501(c)), the right of parents to obtain an independent educational evaluation (34 C.F.R Section
300.502(b)); and the requirement that boards consider evaluations provided by parents. 20 U.S.C.
Sections 1414(e) and 1415(b); 34 C.F.R. Section 300.502(c).

9. While a student is entitled to both the procedural and substantive protections of the IDEA, not
every procedural violation is sufﬁcient to suppmt a ﬁnding that a student was denied FAPE. Mere

16

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

technical violations will not render an IEP invalid. Amanda J. v. Clark County School District, 267 F.3d
877, 892 (9th Cir. 2001). In matters alleging a procedural Violation a due process hearing ofﬁcer may
ﬁnd that a student did not receive a FAPE only if the procedural violation did one of the following: (1)
impeded the child‘s right to a FAPE; (2) signiﬁcantly impeded the parent‘s opportunity to participate in
the decision-making process; or (3) caused a deprivation of educational beneﬁts. 34 C.F.R. Section
300.513(a)(2); LM. v. Capistrano Unified School District, 556 F.3d 900, 909 (9“1 Cir. 2008).

10. The Student argues that the Board made unilateral decisions and shut the parents out of the
decision-making process by refusing to let them speak at PPT meetings, making a unilateral decision to
reduce services in early 2014, and refusing to consider alternative placements for the ninth grade. The
evidence, however, did not support these claims. As a Whole, the evidence painted the picture of a
highly responsive board staff that was truly dedicated to encouraging parental participation and doing
the very best it could for the Student. The school staff conducted many informal parent meetings in
addition to six formal PPT meetings in the seventh and eighth grades. The board’s highest level
administrator overseeing special education attended the PPT meetings. Individual staff members
responded to the many parent e—mail inquiries promptly and courteously.

11. Additionally, the PPT received, adopted and implemented several parental requests and
recommendations, including setting aside time in each school day for teachers to review homework
assignments With the student, adding a goal and services to improve the Student’s organization of
assignments and to include an auditory memory program. The PPT carefully reviewed and considered
the neuropsychological evaluation secured by the parents. And, against its better judgment, the PPT
even revised the Student’s service delivery model in eighth grade, when the Student wanted to attend
Uniﬁed Arts classes.

12. Although the Student argues that the Board’s response to the Uniﬁed Arts incident itself
constituted a procedural violation, the unilateral decisions of the Student and her parents left the Board
with few, if any, appropriate options. Forcing the Student to attend her full IEP schedule was not likely
to produce educational beneﬁt or encourage cooperation. Moreover, once the parents armounced that
they were preparing for due process, it was reasonable for the Board to await the formal resolution
process. In any event, a parent may not ask a school district to accede to her wishes and then try to
punish it for doing so. M M. v. School District, 303 F.3d 523, 333 n.14 (4th Cir. 2002); Cleveland
Heights—Univ. Heights City School District v. Boss, 144 F.2d 391, 398 (6th Cir. 1998).

13. The Student also claims that the parents were not allowed to speak at a few contentious PPT
meetings. The evidence, however, does not support this claim or place the responsibility only at the
Board’s feet. Instead, the testimony and exhibits reﬂect that the parents and their representatives were
responsible for at least some of the acrimony and misunderstanding. Moreover, the fact that school staff
disagreed With the parents or evaluators on some points, including the recommendation for a private
placement, does not mean that the parents’ point of view was not considered. A parent who has had an
opportunity to discuss a proposed 1131’ and whose concerns are considered by the PPT team has
participated in the IEP process in a meaningful way. F uhrmann v. East Hanover Board ofEducation,
993 F.2d 1031, 1036 (3rd Cir. 1993).

’14. The evidence did, however, establish several other material procedural violations of IDEA. Of
particular concern were the PPT’s repeated assurances that the Student was working at “grade level”

17

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14—0572

when in fact, she was falling farther and farther behind, at least in reading. At the end of the sixth grade,
the Student was reading sixth grade material at an independent level and had a reading rate of 115 words
per minute. Yet, by the end of the eighth grade, her reading rate had dropped to 102 words per minute.
Moreover, Dr. Ciocca’s academic achievement testing revealed that in January and February 2014, she
was reading and doing mathematics well below grade level.

15. The Student’s Case Manager testiﬁed during the hearings that the Student was reading on grade
level in seventh and eighth grade if tested using “her accommodations and modiﬁcations”. The
qualiﬁcation to apply accommodations and modiﬁcations, however, was not typically included in the
various progress repotts delivered to the PPT. Although it is true that the parents were well aware of the
Student’s extensive list of accommodations and modiﬁcations, there was nothing in the IEPs to specify
which accommodations and modiﬁcations were used for which assessments or to what extent.

16. A board of education’s inaccurate description of a student’s actual levels of performance has
been recognized as a material procedural Violation of IDEA. 20 U.S.C. Section 1414(d)(1)(A); 34
CPR. Seétion 300.320; RR v, Wullingford Board ofEducatiorz, 101 L.R.P. 196 (D. Conn 2001);
Newtown Public Schools, 107 L.R.P. 59412 (Ct SEA 2007). In both of those cases, like the case here,
inaccurate descriptions of the Student’s level of performance materially violated the procedural
requirement that the IEP reﬂect present levels of performance. Inaccurate descriptions also substantially
interfered with the parents’ ability to participate in the decision making process because they were kept
in the dark about how their child was actually performing.

17. The Board’s choice to set aside Pollock’s diagnosis of “signiﬁcant phonological weaknesses”
and ignore her recommendation for “intensive phonological training” without further assessment or
inquiry also violated IDEA’s procedural mandate. A critical cornerstone of a board’s procedural
obligations under IDEA is to assess the Student in all suspected areas related to her disability. 20 U,S.C.
Section 1414(b)(3); 34 C.F.R. Section 300.304(c)(4).

18. This decision impeded the child‘s right to a FAPE and caused a deprivation of educational
beneﬁt because it resulted in the absence of intense phonological training services and goals and
objectives for phonological weaknesses. It also led to the Board’s failure to assess the Student in
reading ﬂuency and consequently to provide services and goals and objectives in this area. As Ms.
Pollock explained in her report, students with signiﬁcant phonological weaknesses have difﬁculty with
the reading process in general and snuggle with reading comprehension. Yet, although Pollock clearly
identiﬁed reading as a possible area of weakness related to the Student’s disability, the PPT did not
investigate that area and did not offer a specialized reading program 01‘ other services to address her
need.

19. The PPT also failed in its procedural duty to investigate a possible disability related to the
Student’s anxiety and headaches. While it is true that the school staff and the PPT had mixed
information about the Student’s level of anxiety and the frequency of her headaches, the problem was of
sufﬁcient duration and signiﬁcance to warrant evaluation as a possible area of need. Learning
disabilities are known have a close association with anxiety, and the PPT should have evaluated this
area.

20. The Board argues that no one ever recommended or requested that the school system evaluate

18

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

the Student for emotional or behavioral issues. While this is technically true, the school system, and not
the pediatrician, neuropsychologist or parent, was expected to have expertise in both the ﬁeld of
education and the demands of IDEA. The failure of other professionals to accurately place the duty to
assess the Student’s anxiety did not absolve the board of its own responsibility. 20 U.S.C. Section
1414(b)(3); 34 C.F.R. Section 300.304(c)(4).

21. This procedural violation also impeded the Student’s right to FAPE and deprived her of
educational beneﬁt. A more thorough investigation of the problem of anxiety and headaches may well
have led to implementation of special education or related services or accommodations and
modiﬁcations as well as goais and objectives that, in whole or in pait, may have alleviated the Student’s
anxiety, promoted access to her education and met her educational needs.

22. A board of education is also required to ensure that assistive technology is made available to any
child whose special education or related services program requires such technology. 34 C.F.R. Section
300.105. In this case, the board did not conduct an assistive technology evaluation until the end of the
Student’s eighth grade year. The evidence, however, demonstrated that the Student’s program did
include an FM system and that all students in the school had his or her own iPad. There was no
evidence to suggest that any further technology was needed as part of the Student’s program or that an
assistive technology evaluation would have produced information necessary to development of an
appropriate IEP.

23. The Board claims that a number of other procedural Violations not expressly discussed here also
impeded the student’s right to FAPE or deprived her of educational beneﬁts, such as failure to
rigorously and faithfuliy implement all IEP elements from the ﬁrst day of school forward. While there
may have been some lapses in IEP implementation, the evidence did not show any of these to be of
sufﬁcient signiﬁcance to support a deprivation of FAPE or to impede parental involvement.

24. The Board also faltered in its burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that it satisﬁed
the substantive obligation to provide FAPE. In this regard, it was the Board’s burden to prove that the
IEPs at issue were reasonably calcuiated to enable the student to receive educational beneﬁt. Rowley at
206-07 (1982). The Student was not entitled to a "potential—maximizing education" (Id. at p. 197, fn.
21) but was entitled to one that "confers some educational beneﬁt." Id. at. p. 200.

25. Whether an IEP offers the student FAPE is assessed in light of information available at the time
it is developed; it is not judged in hindsight. Adams v, Oregon, 195 F.3d 1141, 1149 (9th Cir. 1999).
"An IEP is a snapshot, not a retrospective.” Fuhrmann v. East Hanover Board ofEducation, 993 F .2d
1031, 1036 (3rd Cir. 1993). It must be Viewed in terms of what was objectively reasonable when the
IEP was developed. Id.

26. When an IEP is premised on a misunderstanding of important aspects of the Student’s disability,
it can hardly provide FAPE. RR v. Wallingford Board ofEducation, 101 L.R.P. 196 (D.Gonn.
2001)(fai1ure to correctly identify disability resulted in substantive FAPE Violation); Newtown Public
Schools, 107 L.R.P. 59412 (Ct SEA 2007)(sarne).

27. In this case, the Board operated under a misdiagnosis of important aspects of the Student’s
language based disability — her signiﬁcant phonologic weakness and her related anxiety - when it

19

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14-0572

designed and implemented her seventh and eighth grade IEPs. As a result, the IEPs did not include
sewices or incorporate goals and objectives14 to address these critical needs and was not reasonably
designed to provide educational beneﬁt.

28. A student’s passing marks and progression from grade to grade are important factors in
determining FAPE, but they are not dispositive. Rowley at 207 n. 28; Mrs. B. v. Milford Board of
Education, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120—21 (2d Cir. 1997). Here in particular, the Student’s grades and
progression from level to level are not reliable indicators of progress because she had very extensive
accommodations and modiﬁcations for class work and test taking, including the ability to use notes and
study guides, modiﬁed content and retaking any test. She did well on the CMT MAS and DRA, but
those tests are not reliable indicators of any particular level of achievement. Her performance on the
STAR assessment did not reﬂect much progress, even if it was a valid indicator. By contrast, the
Student did quite poorly on the standardized achievement tests that Dr. Ciocca administered. These
indicated that she was functioning signiﬁcantly below her grade level in several areas.

29. As a remedy for the failure to provide FAPE, the Student requests an order that the Board pay for
two years of schooling, including summer pro grams15 , at Ben Bronz Academy. 1mpartia1 Hearing
Ofﬁcers have broad discretion to fashion appropriate remedies in due process cases, including to award
compensatory education as an equitab1e remedy for denia1 of FAPE. Draper 12. Atlanta Independent
School System, 518 F.3d 1275, 1285 (11th Cir. 2008); Reid ex rel. Reid v. District ofColumbia, 401 F. 3d
516, 523 (DC. Cir. 2005).

30. Compensatory education should be designed as a "replacement of educational services the child
should have received in the ﬁrst place" and should "elevate [the Student] to the position he would have
occupied absent the school board's failures." Reid ex rel. Reid v. District of Columbia, 401 F. 3d 516,
518, 524-27 (DC. Cir. 2005).

31. The Board argues that the requested remedy amounts to a prospective placement at Ben Bronz
Academy during a period that another local education agency, Region 19, is responsible for the
Student’s education. While this is tme, the Student is not legally required to attend Region 19’s school
so long as she is educated elsewhere and Region 19 has no legal right to educate the Student. C.G.S.
Section 10-186. Moreover, if the Hearing Ofﬁcer cannot award prospective compensatory educational
sewices there wi11 be no remedy to address the denial of FAPE in this case, a result the law does not

favor.

32. These facts are highly analogous to those presented in the many other cases where students were
denied FAPE but are no longer under the respondent board’s jurisdiction by the time a due process
award is issued. Hearing Ofﬁcers and courts have had no difﬁcu1ty providing compensatory education
remedies for students who have moved from, or aged out of, the respondent’s district. See Draper v,
Atlanta Independent School System, 518 F.3d 1275, 1285 (11‘h Cir. 2008) and Reid ex rel. Reid v.
District ofCoZumbia, 401 F. 3d 516, 518, 524—27 (DC. Cir. 2005).

M There was one objective for ﬂuency in the eighth grade, but this was too little too late.

15 The Student’s IEPs included extended year programming in the seventh and eighth grades. From this
it is reasonable to infer that the Student requires summer programming in order to beneﬁt from her
program. 34 CPR. Section 300.106.

20

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14—0572

33. The Board also objects to the proposed remedy because Ben Bronz Academy is highly
segregated and is not the “least restrictive environment” for educating the Student. While this
consideration is valid and impoﬁant, the law is also well established that private placements are not held
to the same standards as public schools in this regard. School Committee ofBurlington v. Department of
Education, 471 US. 359, 369 (1985); Draper v. Atlanta Independent School System, 518 F.3d 1275,
1286 (11th Cir. 2008); Frank G. v. Board ofEducalion, 459 F.3d 356, 365 (2d Cir. 2006).

34. Impaitial Hearing Ofﬁces in Connecticut have found Ben Bronz Academy to be an appropriate
private placement for students with language and reading disabilities on several occasions. RR. v.
Wallingford Board of Education, 101 L.R.P. 196 (D. Conn. 2001): Wallingford Board of Education, 108
L.R.P. 60540 (Ct SEA 2008);

35. The fact that Ben Bronz Academy does not have a speech language therapist on staff and may
not offer classes in art 01‘ computers similarly does not disqualify it as an appropriate school for the
Student. Frank G. v. Board of Education, 459 F .3d 356, 365 (2d Cir. 2006)(private placement need not
be perfect). Moreover, speech language services can be arranged in conjunction with or separate from
the Ben Bronz Academy program.

36. The Student requests two years of compensatory services including summer programs, arguing
that she had two years of an inappropriate programming from the Board. An award of compensatory
services is not, however, based on an established logarithm, but instead on equitable considerations.
Reid ex rel. Reid v. District ofCalumbia, 401 F. 3d 516, 524 (DC. Cir. 2005).

37. The equitable factors here weigh against a full two school year remedy for a number of reasons.
F irst, the expectation is that an intensive and highly individualized program at Ben Bronz Academy will
quickly shore up the Student’s readiness for the academic demands of high school. Moreover, since the
Student beneﬁts from access to non—disabled peers, it would be inappropriate to extend her hiatus from
public school for any longer than is absolutely necessary. Finally, there is every reason for conﬁdence
that E.O. Smith High School will be provide an appropriate program to meet the Student’s needs as they
will exist upon completion of the Ben Bronz program. E.O. Smith High School will have the beneﬁt of
the Student’s experience at Ben Bronz, as well as all of her evaluations and experience through the
eighth grade, in determining her needs at that time.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board of Education did not provide the Student with a free appropriate public education
between July 1, 2012 and July 1, 2014.

2. The Board of Education will pay all expenses associated with one academic year of educational
programming, including extended year/summer services, at Ben Bronz Academy. The Ben Bronz
program will commence either as soon as possible or with the stait 0f the 2015-2016 School Year (to
include the Summer of 2015) as designated by the Student’s parents.

3. If Ben Bronz Academy is not available or becomes unavailable for any reason, another similar
institution approved by the Connecticut Department of Education and specializing in educating students

21

 

March 31, 2015 Final Decision and Order 14—0572

with language and learning disabilities that is acceptable to the Student’s parents will be substituted.

4. The Board of Education will provide transportation for the Student to attend Ben Bronz
Academy (or a substituted school).

5. The Board of Education will provide speech language services for a minimum of one hour per
week with goals and obj ectives determined by Ben Bronz Academy (or a substituted school) for the
Student during 01' after school hours while she attends Ben Bronz Academy (or a substituted school). If
such services are not provided at Ben Bronz Academy (at a substituted school), the Board of Education
Will also transport the Student to and from the location that such services are provided.

6. The Board of Education will also pay for an independent evaluation of the Student’s anxiety
and/or emotional status as they impact her education by a person of the Parents’ choice that meets the
Board of Education’s criteria for such evaluations. The evaluation is to be conducted as soon as
practical and shared with the Student’s school team.

22

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

@PW

Hearing oﬁcer Signature

ﬂwppng

Hearing Officer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

