July 9, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0461

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl V. Preston Board of Education and Notwich Free Academy
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Mother, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Kyle McClain
Siegel O’Connor O’Donnell & Beck PC
150 Trumbull Street 5'“ Floor
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing on behalf of Notwich Free Academy: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses
Bei'chem Moses & Devlin PC
57 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

Procedural Posture

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Mother via Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing dated April 2, 2014.2 It was received
by the Board of Education (“BOB”) on April 3.

A pre-hearing conference was scheduled for April 17. On April 16, BOE and NFA ﬁled a
J oint Sufﬁciency Challenge alleging that the Request For Hearing failed to set forth “a description
of the nature of the problem of the child relating to the proposed 01'1'efused initiation or change,
including facts relating to the problem.” The Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a written decision deeming the
Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing to be insufﬁcient under 20 U.S.C. 1415; 34 CFR
300.508; and Connecticut State Regulations Section 10-7611-3. Student was given leave to amend
the Request by May 3. The pre—hearing conference was postponed pending ﬁling of an amended
Request.

Student’s Mother ﬁled an Amended Request for Impaitial Special Education Hearing
(“Amended Request”) on May 2. It was received by BOE’s Attorney and Norwich Free Academy’s
(“NFA’s”) Attorney on May 2. On May 16, BOB and NFA ﬁled a Joint Sufﬁciency Challenge
alleging that the Amended Request For Hearing failed to set forth a description of the nature of the
problem of the child relating to the proposed or refused initiation or change, including facts relating
to the problem. The Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a written decision deeming the Amended Request for
Impartial Special Education Hearing to be sufﬁcient under 20 U.S.C. 1415; 34 CFR 3001508; and
Connecticut State Regulations Section 10—76h—3.

The timelines reset based on the ﬁling of the Amended Request The 30-day resolution
period ended J une 1. The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was July 16.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974,
20 U.S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student“, “Parents”,
“School” and titles of school staff members and certain other witnesses in place of names and other personally
identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2014 unless otherwise indicated.

July 9, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0461

A telephonic pi'e-hearing conference was held on May 21. Student’s Mother appeared on
behalf of Student, Attorney McClain appeared on behalf of BOB, and Attorney Moses appeared on
behalfofNFA.

The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education and Norwich Free Academy appropriately implement

Student’s January 2014 IEP after February 6, 2014?
2. Did the Board of Education and Norwich Free Academy propose an appropriate IEP for
Student in April 2014?

31 If the answer to any of the above Issues One through Two is in the negative, what shall

be the remedy?

A hearing convened on June 18, at which Student’s Mother made an opening statement and
put on three of the seven witnesses identiﬁed on her witness list. A second day of hearing was
scheduled for July 1 1.

On June 19, NFA’s Attorney ﬁled a request for extension of the mailing date to
accommodate the J uly 11 hearing. Student’s Mother agreed with the request for an extension.
After fully considering the paities’ positions, the request for an extension of the mailing date was
granted. The deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended thirty days to August 10.

On June 20, Student’s Mother ﬁled a motion to dismiss the case without prejudice. She
indicated that “[s]hould further explanation be required to substantiate my request, I will cettainly
expound upon your directive.” The Hearing Ofﬁcer asked her to indicate the basis for the request to
dismiss without prejudice.

On June 22, Student’s Mother ﬁled Motion With Basis to Dismiss Without Prejudice. Her
motion indicated that, on June 19, she was required to begin a new medical treatment that cannot be
delayed. She further indicated that she is concerned about the conﬂict remaining unresolved.

On June 27, NFA’s Attorney and BOE’s Attorney ﬁled a Joint Objection to the Motion to
Dismiss Without Prejudice. The motion did not identify the length of medical treatment 01‘ whether
Student’s Mother can continue to participate in the case after an extension to allow her to complete
her medical treatment.

Because the parties committed time and resources to the hearing, including ﬁling and
responding to motions and other requests; ﬁling exhibits; preparing witnesses; and taking testimony
ﬁ'om three witnesses, it was deemed that a dismissal without prejudice was not appropriate and
would be prejudicial to B013 and NFA. The Motion to Dismiss Without Prejudice was denied.
Student’s Mother was given the option to proceed to hearing on July 1 1; request a reasonable
additional extension of the mailing date to allow her to proceed with hearing after completion of her
medical treatment; or request dismissal with prejudice.

On June 30, Student’s Mother ﬁled Parent Motion with Basis to Dismiss With Prejudice.
The motion stated that Student and Student’s Parents wish to “assure both the BOE and [NFA] that
we have never wanted to have any claims against them, nor do we ever want to have any claims
against them.”3

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed with prejudice.

3 The Motion asks for advice on the status of the proposed April 2, 2014 Individualized Education Fragrant (“IEP”),
Student’s Mother has decided to request dismissal of the case as opposed to continuing the heating to completion,
Therefore, a substantive ruling on the issues will not be made and the Hearing Ofﬁcer will not provide legal advice or
otherwise comment on the status of the IEP,

v

Ifthc local or regional board ofcducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for

‘ " providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescn'ption of the hearing ofﬁcer withm ﬁﬁcm days aﬁcr ‘
receipt thereof, the Stat'e Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or- prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

, Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
court by either party in accprdance with the provisidns of Section 4-183, Connccﬁcut
General Statutes, and Titlc 20 United Statcs‘Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

;earin armg Ofﬁcer Signature

CSPYN l3 C. CSERMJ’N

. Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

sigupage. doc (ho disk)
4/x/o4 ,

......-.,.~;' ‘ umsmu‘ "‘ ' L" ‘

