January 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order No. 140323

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Middletown Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecca R. Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza

Haltford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Was the educational evaluation conducted by the Board appropriate? If not;

2. Should the Board conduct an independent educational evaluation at public expense?
SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:
The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education
(FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20
U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.
At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rejected the educational evaluation
performed by the Board. The Parents requested an independent educational evaluation at public

expense. The Board refused the Parents request and ﬁled for a due process hearing.

An impattial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on December 19, 2013 and a pre-hearing conference
was held on January 3, 2014. The hearing date chosen by the parties was February 11, 2014.

On January 15, 2014, the palties informed the hearing ofﬁcer that they were able to resolve the
matter in mediation and the Board’s attorney withdrew the matter with prejudice.

The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is February 2, 2014.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is dismissed with prejudice.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁeen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
coult by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

   

 

( Hearing Off‘i‘eTLSignamre

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

