December 16, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0174

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Redding Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Courtney P. Spencer
Law Ofﬁce ofCourtney P. Spencer

701 Hebron Avenue
Glastonbtuy, CT 06033

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses
Bei'chem Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney
via letter dated September 13, 2013.] It was received by Board of Education’s (“BOE’S”) Attorney on
September 13. The 30—day resolution period ended October 13. The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal
decision and order was November 27.

A telephonic pre—hearing conference was held 011 October 4. Attorney Spencer appeared on
behalfof Student and Attorney Moses appeared on behalf of BOB. The following issues were
identiﬁed:

1‘ Did the Board ot‘EducatiOh fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during

the 201 1~12 school year?

2. Did the Board 01" Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education during

the 2012—1 3 school year?

3. Should the Board of Education be required to provide Student with two years of

compensatory education and/or placement at Wellspring?

4. 1f the answer to any of the above Issues One through Two is in the afﬁrmative, what shall be

the remedy?

The parties participated in mediation on October 21. The case did not resolve at that time.

Via e—mail dated October 31, Student’s Attorney requested a 30—day extension of the mailing
date to schedule hearing dates. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request for
extension was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until
December 27.

A hearing was scheduled for December 16. Via letter dated December 6, Student’s Attorney
indicated that the parties had executed an agreement and withdrew the request for hearing with
prej udiee.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light ot‘the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed with prejudice.

‘ All dates are 2013 unless otherwise indicated.

V.

if the local or regional boafd ofeducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for

,' ' “‘groyi‘ding special "education for the student requin'ng special education does not take

action'on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁeen days after V
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropri_ate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or-prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

' Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing oﬁﬁcer may bemade to state or federal
court by either party in accprdance With the provisions ofSection 4-183, Connecticut

General Statutes, and Title 20 United States'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

. QM

' g Ofﬁcer Signatuxe

(MN l3 (2. .QE-u'ZMJ’N

. Heim'ng OﬂScer Name in Print .

signpagedoc (ho disk)
mm * " ,

“u“... ‘ »_'\.-.;..x~.:.i ‘" ":

 

