October 22, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0176

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Region 4 Board of Education

Appearing on behalfofthe Parent: Pro Se
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Pro Se
Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board commit procedural Violations by not providing the Parent with a complete
copy 0fthe Student’s individualized education plan (1131’) thereby denying the Student a
free and appropriate public education (FAPE)?

2. Did the Board fail to provide a complete copy of the Student’s educational record thereby
denying FAPE?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as being entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 USC. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut
General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents requested a complete copy of the
Student’s IEP. The Board did not provide the Parent with the IEP. ;

On September 17, 2013, the Board received notice ot‘the Parents’ request for due process The
palties agreed to go to a resolution meeting.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on September 16, 2013 and a preheating conference
was held on September 24, 2013. At the preheating conference the Parent informed the hearing

ofﬁcer that they had resolved the matter at the resolution meeting and requested a withdrawal
without prejudice.

The (late for the mailing ot‘the Final Decision and Order is November 29, 2013.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS WITHDRAWN WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiﬁng special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

r’lr’\ ' , ,x

 

 

Hearing Offd’ef‘ﬁignamre
\

Justine Rosado
Hearing Officer Name in Print

sigupagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

