July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0433

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Monroe Board 01' Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf ofthe Board: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq,
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1, Was the Functional Behavioral Assessment (FBA) conducted by the Board
appropriate? It‘not;
2. Should the Board conduct an independent FBA at public expense?

JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §10-
7611 and related regu1ations, 20 United States Code§1415(t) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedures Act, CGS §§4—176e to 4178, inclusive,
and 4-181a and 4—186.

SUMMARY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Speech or Language Impairment and is entitled to receive a
free and appropriate public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute
§10-76a et seq,

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent stated that the functional behavioral
assessment was not appropriate and requested an independent FBA at public expense. The
Board denied the Parent’s request and on March 19, 2014 ﬁled for due process.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on March 19, 2014, a pre—hearing conference was
held on March 26, 2014. Hearing dates of May 19 and 29, 2014 and June 2, 2014 were chosen
by the parties. The Board presented Exhibits 1 thru 15 which were full exhibits of the hearing.

 

July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0433

Parents presented Exhibits 1 through 39 but only Parents’ Exhibitsl 1,6, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18
were accepted as full exhibits of the hearing. Parents” Exhibits 7~13 and 18—39 were marked for
identiﬁcation only and were not utilized during the hearing; they are not full exhibits of the
hearing. P-21 and P—22 are blank numbers and no exhibit/doeument was present in the assigned
number.

The Parents presented one witness and the Board presented three witnesses The Board objected
to the Parents’ witness and their objection was overruled since the witness was listed as a
member of the FBA team.

At the May 29, 2014 hearing date, the Mother presented a document which she would read as her
testimony. The Mother was informed that a narrative would not be the appropriate way to testify
and requested that she redact it to a question and answer format and have someone ask her the
question and she would respond with an answer. At the May 19 and 29, 2014 hearing dates, the
Mother had someone accompany her to the hearing. The hearing was adjourned to the next
scheduled hearing date.

At the J une 2, 2014 hearing date, the Mother was not prepared to testify because she did not have
anyone to ask her the questions and was not willing to testify.

In order to accommodate the Mother, she was asked if she had the narrative she had previously
prepared; if so, she could read it on the record and the Board could question her from the
narrative. The Mother stated she had not brought the narrative; to accommodate the Mother, the
hearing ofﬁcer asked if she wanted to have a recess and she could go home and get the narrative.
The Mother stated that part of the narrative would not be allowed based on prior rulings from the
hearing ofﬁcer and felt that she was being forced to rest her case. The Board offered to adjourn
the hearing and allow the Mother additional time to prepare her testimony or a narrative. The
hearing ofﬁcer agreed to the Board’s reconnnendation. The Mother refused the alternative
offered to prepare and would not testify. The Parents rested their case.

A brieﬁng schedule was discussed and the parties agreed to ﬁle simultaneous post trial briefs on
June 26, 2014. The briefs were timely ﬁled by both parties. The parties were instructed that any
arguments presented in the briefs had to have a basis of prior evidence presented during the
course of the hearing. The Parents, in their post-trial brief, made reference to articles about
FBAsV These articles were not palt of the evidentiary portion of this hearing and were not used
by the hearing ofﬁcer in deciding this matter.

This Final Decision and Order set forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set forth herein, which
reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other suppoﬁed
evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the
extent that the summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of
law, they should be so considered and vice versa. SAS lnslilule Inc: v. S, & H Computer
Systems, Inc, 605 F.Supp. 816 (MDTemr 1985) and Bonnie Ann F. v. Callallen Independent
School Board, 835 F.Supp. 340 (SDfl‘ex. 1993).

' Hereafter Parents’ Exhibits will be noted as “P” followed by the number ofthe exhibit.

2

July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0433

The date for the mailing ot‘the F inal Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the
hearing date and the brieﬁng schedule. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is
August 1, 2014.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1.

U!

The Student is diagnosed with Speech or Language Impairment and is eligible to receive
special education and related services as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Improvement Act (“IDEA”) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10~76a. (Board’s Exhibit2 No. 2).

During the 2013-2014 school year, the Student attended the ﬁrst grade at the Board’s
elementary school. Based on concerns raised at the December 13, 2013 PPT meeting the
Board recommended that an FBA be conducted. (B—2)

The Student was exhibiting noncompliance in his school program. The Student was
refusing to do his work, follow direction and leave the classroom when required. The
Student was also having difficulty on the school bus. The Board was concerned with his
safety and recommended that an FBA be performed and special transportation was
provided. The Parent agreed With the assessment and signed consent for the FBA.
(Testimony of School Psychologist, 8-2)

At the January 13, 2014 PPT, the Board reconnnended Creative Solutions to assist with
the FBA and the development of a behavioral intervention plan (BIP), (Testimony of
School Psychologist, B-7)

The Board retained a Behavioral and Educational Consultant from Creative Solutions to
conduct the F BA ot‘the Student. The Consultant has extensive experience in conducting
FBAs. The Consultant has graduate ceitiﬂcation in applied behavioral analysis and a
Master’s Degree in Education. She has performed over one hundred FBAs and has
extensive work experience in collecting data on behavioral programs, analyzing the data
and creating behavioral intervention programs for students. (Testimony of Consultant
from Creative Solutions (CCS), B—15)

The school psychologist led the team that conducted the FBA. She has received various
trainings and has been responsible for Functional Behavioral Assessments in various
Districts as well as crisis intervention counseling. The school psychologist has also
conducted over 30 FBAsi She performed various observations of the Student in order to
collect data of the Student’s non—complianee behaviotx (Testimony of School
Psychologist, B-13)

An FBA is an assessment to identify the functions of particular targeted behavior and
determine the antecedents and consequences of the behavior. The consultant then
develops a plan to change that behavior. There is no standard protocol for a functional
behavioral assessment. Direct observations 01‘ the Student are performed and his

2 Hereafter Board‘s Exhibits will be noted as “B” followed by the number ofthe exhibit

3

 

July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0433

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

16.

interactive style in the base enviromnent is observed. Interviews are conducted with staff
and parents and the evaluator looks at collected data and creates a hypothesis based upon
the collected data. (Testimony of CCS)

The target behaviors should be clearly deﬁned so that any person on the Student’s team
can identify the behavior in the natural environment. A data collection system has to be
developed in conducting FBAs so that everyone is collecting the same data. The
information gathered needs to be presented stating the variables in the environment that
are generating the target behaviors. (Testimony of Consultant from Cooperative
Educational Services (CES)).

During the month of January 2014, the Student was observed in a variety ofsettings
during the school day. His attendance and discipline records were reviewed as part of the
FBA. His academic performance, prior assessments and health records were also
reviewed. (B-9)

The CCS evaluator interviewed the Student’s classroom teacher, special education
teacher, the school principal, the Student’s speech and language pathologist and his
paraprofessional in order to obtain background information about the Student. (B—9,
Testimony of CCS)

The Consultant from Creative Solutions attempted to speak with the Parents. The Parents
requested that they not be involved, (Testimony of CCS)

The CCS evaluator conducted two clinical observations and collected data from different
school settings. During one of the observations, the Student demonstrated unsafe
behavior in the classroom. He leﬁ the classroom and ran to the library and then to the
bathroom. During this episode the Student struck the special education teacher and bit
the evaluator. The Student was placed in a full security basket hold and did not calm
down quickly. The Parent was informed and a report written. (Testimony of CCS, P—17)

The evaluator observed the Student in his mainstream classroom setting and observed his
noncompliance with directions given. When attempts were made to redirect, the Student
would attempt to escape the environment, (Testimony CCS)

In accordance with her standard practice, the consultant drafted a report consistent with
her standard format. She also drafted a Behavioral Intervention Plan. (8-9, B—1 1)

. A total of 30 episodes were recorded during the antecedent, behavior, and consequence

(ABC) data collection process. The target behaviors were in the form of non—eomplianee
(non-verbal) and work refusal (verbal) (Testimony 01‘school psychologist, 8—9)

The primary function of the Student’s behavior was to escape or avoid a task or demand.
A secondary function oi’the behavior is to gain attention. (8-9)

July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0433

17.

18.

19.

A Behavioral intervention plan was proposed by the consultant from CCS and reviewed
by the PPT on March 10, 20141 The plan addressed the Student’s two target behaviors:
work refusal and non-compliance. It provided teaching strategies to address the targeted
behaviors and a break schedule as a means to give the Strident structured appropriate
ways of escape. It provided the school team with positive rehlforcement strategies to
encourage the Student to remain on task. Strategies were provided to address the
Student’s behavior to gain attention, (B-1 1)

The Parents were not in agreement with either the FBA or the BlP. They could not give
speciﬁcs as to their disagreements, but felt that the true functions were not addressed in
the FHA They requested an independent FBA conducted by a qualiﬁed board certiﬁed
behavioral analyst (BCBA). (B—1 1)

At the March 10, 2014 PPT, the Board agreed to contract a BCBA from Cooperative
Educational Services (CES) to review the Student’s record and the FBA. The consultant
found that the target behaviors of work refusal and 11011-compliance were clearly deﬁned.
The consultant found a clear connection between the deﬁned behaviors and the data
collection. The purpose of the FBA was also clearly deﬁned. The consultant was of the
opinion that additional information from a third party would not be beneﬁcial or required.
The results of the FBA performed by the Board were accurate and comprehensive.

(T estimony of Consultant from CBS, B—12)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW and ARGUMENT:

1.

It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services as
set forth in IDEA, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1401, et seq. FAPE is deﬁned as special education and
related services that are provided at public expense, meet the standards of the state
educational agency, include an appropriate school education, and that are provided in
conformity with the IEP. 20 U.S.C. §1401(8).

The Board filed this request for due process in accordance with the provisions of 34
CPR. Section 302.502(b)(2) which provides that, “[I]1‘ a parent requests an independent
evaluation at public expense, the public agency must, without unnecessary delay,.. i)[fjile
a due process request to show that its evaluation is appropriate;” ii‘the parents’ request is
not granted. The sole issue to be determined in this matter is whether the Board’s
evaluation is appropriate.

OSEP explained in Leller Io Chriit-Iiamenh48 LDELR 161 (OSEP 2007), that a district
that intends to conduct a functional behavioral assessment (FBA) should ask itselt‘one
question: Will the FBA focus on the educational and behavioral needs ofa speciﬁc child?
11‘ so, the FBA qualifies as an evaluation or reevaluation under Part B and triggers all of
the accompanying procedural safeguards, including the need to seek parental consent. In
the current matter, the Parent consented to the F BA. (Findings of Fact No. 2)

 

July 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 140433

4. In determining the standard of appropriateness of the evaluation, IDEA regulations
provide standards for the manner in which evaluations are to be conducted. T hese
standards are set foxth in 34 C.F.R. §300.300 to 34 C.F.R. §300.311. Connecticut
regulations implement these IDEA regulations in R.C.S.At §10-76d—9(a).

5. In reviewing the standard of appropriateness of an evaluation, the focus is on whether the
evaluation (1) used a variety of essential tools; (2) was administered by trained,
knowledgeable, and qualiﬁed personnel; (3) was administered and conducted under
standard conditions and in accordance with instructions provided by the producer of the
assessments; (4) incorporated information from various sources such as classroom
observations and review of existing data; and (5) whether the independent evaluation
would provide any new or additional information. Warren G. v. Cumberland County
School District, 190 F.3d 80, 87 (3rd Cir. 1999)

6. The IDEA does not specify who is qualiﬁed to conduct FBAs. In Letter to Janssen, 51
IDELR 253 (OSERS 2008), OSERS stated that there is no requirement that a board—
certiﬁed behavior analyst or any other speciﬁc individual conduct an FBA unless state
law requires it. Although the IDEA does not state who may conduct FBAs, the evaluator
who conducts an FBA must be adequately trained. Connecticut does not provide a
requirement for an evaluator to conduct an FBA. I ﬁnd the evaluator qualiﬁed to conduct
an FBA. She was supervised in this assessment by the school psychologist who also was
very well qualiﬁed to supervise the assessment, and did so in an appropriate manner. She
has also conducted various FBAs. (Findings of Fact Nos. 4, 5 and 6)

7. The FBA used multiple tools and assessments, which further leads to the conclusion that
this assessment was appropriate. According to the consultant and school psychologist, an
FBA consists of both indirect and direct assessment; data collection across multiple
enviromnents, direct observations of the student, standardized questionnaires of staff and
the student, review of records, staff consultation and data analysis. This protocol was
followed and set forth in great detail in the comprehensive report. The FBA is clearly
appropriate in its use ofnondiscriminatory assessments tools which included
observations. Based on the expansiveness of this FBA, and the professional manner in
which it was completed, there is no additional, better information that could be obtained
from another FBA. (Findings ofFaet Nos. 17 and 19)

8. To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed herein,
the Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:
1. The Functional Behavioral Assessment conducted by the Board is appropriate.

2. The Board does not have to fund the independent Functional Behavioral Assessment
requested by the Parents.)

 

Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcen

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

-7 I ,,

 

 

Hearing OftYSFSignature

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

