August 28, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0598

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Danbury Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attomey Courtney F. Spencer
Law Ofﬁces of Courtney F. Spencer
100 Riverview Center, Suite 290
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecea R. Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the program provided by the Board for the 2013—2014 school year appropriate and did it
provide the Student with a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive
environment (LRE)?

2. Was the transition plan provided by the Board appropriate? If not;

3. Is the student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of FAPE?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Multiple Disabilities and is entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in
the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the
Parents rejected the exiting of the Student from special education. The Parents requested compensatory
education for the denial of FAPE. The Student is over the age of twenty-one. The Board refused the
Parents’ request. On June 18, 2014, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process.
The parties agreed to go to mediation in place of a resolution meeting. The mediation session was
scheduled. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 18, 2014 and a pre—hearing conference
was held on June 26, 2014. Hearing dates of September 4 and 5, 2014 were chosen by the parties.

The Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss alleging that the issues were barred by a prior settlement
agreement. The Parents ﬁled a timely objection. The Motion to Dismiss was denied; the issues
presented were for a school year not covered by the prior settlement agreement. In an electronic
transmission, the Parents’ attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter had been resolved and
withdrew the matter with prejudice. The date for the mailing of the F inal Decision and Order was
extended to accommodate the parties’ mediation and the hearing dates. The date for mailing the F inal
Decision and Order is August 29, 2014.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the Student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

’1 v r ,)

 

Hearing OfﬁErZSiglajme

  

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

