June 19, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0480

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Greenwich Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler
Town of Greenwich
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Is the Student eligible to receive special education and related services as deﬁned in the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA)? If so;

2. Does the unilateral placement of the Student at Spire School in Stamford, CT provide the student
with a meaningful education?

3. Should the Board reimburse the Parents for the cost of their unilateral placement of the Student
at Spire School?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned IDEA 20 U.S.C. §1401 et

seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting,
the team determined that the Student was not eligible to receive special education and related services as
deﬁned in IDEA. The Parents requested a ﬁnding of eligibility. The Board refused the Parents’ request.

On April 14, 2014, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. The parties agreed
to forego a resolution meeting and mediate the matter. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on
April 14, 2014 and a pre—hearing conference was held on April 24, 2014. The hearing dates of June 3
and 6, 2014 were chosen by the parties.

In an electronic transmission the parties requested a postponement of the June 3, 2014 hearing date in
order to accommodate the execution of an agreement. In a June 6, 2014 electronic transmission the
Parents stated that the agreement had been memorialized and the matter was withdrawn with prejudice.
The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is June 27, 2014.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take ‘
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

