May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0452

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

East Windsor Board ofEducation v. Parent
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni and Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
w
Was the Board’s most recent recommendation of a diagnostic placement of Student appropriate?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This hearing was requested by Board on March 31, 2014 and the Hearing Officer was appointed
on that same date. The date for mailing the decision is May 15, 2014. The pre-hearing
conference was held on April 28, 2014. The hearing was scheduled for May 7, 2014 and
convened on that date.

The Board’s witnesses were Patrick Tudryn, Director of Special Education; J ason Smith,
Assistant Principal; Patrick Gibbons, Special Education Teacher; Patricia O’Connor, School
Counselor; and Donald Case1la, School Behavioral Intewentionist and Safe School Climate
Coordinator. The Parent served as Student’s only witness. Parent declined to stay for the entire
hearing and left before the Board had ﬁnished presenting its case.

The Parent submitted an exhibit P—l which was entered as a full exhibit. The Board submitted
exhibits numbered B—l to B-16 which were entered as ﬁ11l exhibits. The Board’s Special
Education Due Process Hearing Request was entered as Hearing Ofﬁcer’s exhibit and marked
1-10-1‘

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

To the extent that the procedura1 history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. For reference, see SAS
Institute Inc v H. Computer Systems, Inca, 605 F.Supp. 816 (M.D. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann
F. v Ca/al/en Independent School District, 835 F.Supp. 340, 20 IDELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993).

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0452

SUMMARY:

The Student is thirteen years old and currently enrolled in seventh grade at East Windsor Middle
School. Student entered the East Windsor School District in the 2012-2013 academic year as a
regular education student, Student was referred for an evaluation to determine if he was eligible
for Special Education in sixth grade. Educational and Psychological Evaluations were conducted
and the Student was identiﬁed as eligible for Special Education under the Disability Category of
Other Health 1111pai1'ed—Attention Deﬁcit Disorder/Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder.
Beginning shortly aﬁer his enrollment in the East Windsor School District, Student began to
engage in behaviors that signiﬁcantly impeded his learning and his ability to successfully interact
with his peers. In response to Student’s behaviors, Student was placed in an intensive program
with six students. This program was implemented on-site at the East Windsor Middle School
and was staffed by a special education teacher and two tutors and had in place additional
supports in the form of counseling and consultation with other professionals on an as needed
basis. Student was placed in this intensive program so that Student could learn to identify and
change those behaviors that negatively impacted Student socially and academically. Despite
being placed in a highly structured environment with clear expectations, reduced distractions and
modiﬁed expectations, Student’s behavior failed to respond to the Behavior Intervention Plan
and little progress was made in meeting Student’s Individualized Education Program (‘IEP”)
goals and objectives. The PPT determined that it required more information in order to better
understand Student’s needs and address those needs in Student’s IEP. The PPT recommended a
diagnostic placement for Student, where a clinical psychological evaluation could be conducted.
Parent rejected the PPT recommendation and the Board ﬁled a Special Education Due Process
Hearing in response.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10-
7611 and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A1P.A.), CiG.S. §§4-176e t0 4-
178, inclusive, §§4-1 81a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Patties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, 1 ﬁnd the following facts:

1. Student was born on September 13, 2000, and is now thilteen years ofage. He is eligible for
Special Education and Related Sewices under the Primaly Disability Category of Other
Health IInpaiJ'ed—Attention Deﬁcit Disorder/Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder.
(Exhibits HO—l and B-9)

2. Student had a transition in residential custody between parents in the past year. (Testimony
of Parent)

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14~0452

10.

11.

12‘

Student was enrolled in the East Windsor School District beginning in the 2012-2013 school
year. Student’s prior em‘ollment was in the Enﬁeld Public Schools. (Testimony ot‘Assistant
Principal) The Enﬁeld Public Schools had conducted testing on Student in fourth grade but
found him ineligible at that time. (Id.)

Soon after enrollment, Student began to engage in behaviors that were disruptive to his
learning and that of other students. (Testimony of Assistant Principal, B-16) Student also
struggled with acknowledging wrong—doing and taking personal responsibility for his actions.
(1d)

Student’s behavior included bullying, making threats and swearing at a teacher. (Testimony
ofAssistant Principal) Consequences instituted by the school included revoking walking
home privileges, and in—school and out of school suspensions. (1d,)

By December 5, 2013, Student had 13 discipline referrals for acts including creating a
disturbance, bullying bus incidents, violating school rules, inappropriate classroom behavior,
inappropriate language, and disrespect ofa staff member. (Testimony of Assistant Principal;
B-7)

Discipline of Student was addressed by Assistant Principal for the ﬁrst two months 01‘ the
2012-2013 school year. (Testimony of Assistant Principal)

By the end ot’October of the 2012-2013 academic year, the School had identiﬁed social and
emotional concerns that they felt necessitated a referral to determine eligibility for Special
Education and Related Sewices. (Testimony ofAssistant Principal; B—1)

In addition to disciplinary actions taken by the Assistant Principal, the School had attempted
to address Student’s behavior by permitting Student to complete work in different classrooms
when a conﬂict arose and to take self—directed time—outs in the library. (8—1)

A Planning and Placement Team Meeting (“PPT”) was held on October 23, 2013. (B-2)
During this PPT Meeting, the Board recommended a 45 day diagnostic placement in the
Discovery Program, a self—contained program offered on-site at the East Windsor Middle
School. (8-2) The PPT agreed to place Student in the Discovery Program and he was then
transitioned into that program. (1d,)

On December 12, 2013, a PPT meeting was held to review evaluation results and determine
eligibility for Special Education. (B-8)

The educational evaluation of Student conducted on December 1, 2013 indicates that
Student’s overall level of achievement is average (B—6) The Woodcock—Johnson 111 test
results, on which the educational evaluation was based, indicate that Student’s oral language
skills are in the low average range, while his broad written language, written expression and
brief writing scores are in the average to high average range. (Testimony of Special
Education Teacher, B-6)

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0452

13.

141

15‘

16.

17.

18‘

The psychological evaluation of Student dated December 5, 2013, found that Student was
rated At—stk 0r Clinically Signiﬁcant in a number of areas on the Behavior Assessment
System for Children (BASC—Z). Areas of concern identiﬁed were: locus of control, attitude
to teachers, aggression, conduct problems, anxiety, depression, atypicality, withdrawal,
hyperactivity, attention problems, relationship with parents, interpersonal relationships,
adaptability, social skills, leadership, and functional communications. (B—7) Student’s
cognitive testing indicated that his overall intellectual functioning falls in the low average
range. (Id.) The school psychologist found that based on Student’s cognitive functioning,
Student should be able to meet grade level requirements with minor assistance. (1d,)
Counseling was a suggested component of Student’s program. (Id.)

The PPT, on December 12, 2013, after reviewing the evaluation results and teacher repotts,
determined that the Student was eligible for Special Education under the OHI—ADD/ADHD
disability category and developed an Individualized Education Program “IEP” for the
Student. (B—9) A Behavioral Intervention Plan (“BIP”) was a component of Student’s IEP.
(Id.)

Student’s ﬁrst IEP goal was to demonstrate an improvement in socially acceptable behaviors
in the school environment. (B—9) This goal was suppOIted by the following objectives:
complying with classroom rules and regulations, remaining on task during the class lessons
and completing classwork and eliminating avoidance behaviors that involve leaving the
classroom, complying with school mles and regulations throughout the day and during
unstructured time, complying with teacher directives and requests in a socially acceptable
manner, and accepting limits imposed by adults in the educational environment. (B-9)

Student’s second IEP goal was to demonstrate an improvement in deeision—making skills.
(B-9) Objectives aligned with this goal were to demonstrate the ability to deﬁne the
available choices in a given situation and the projected outcomes of each choice and
demonstrate the ability to formulate a plan for responsible decision—making. (1d,)

Accommodations provided to the Student to address academic needs included extra time to
complete assignments, small group work and test settings, posted assignments, minimizing
and structuring transitions and preferential seating. (B-9) Accommodations to address
behavioral concerns included chatting progress and maintaining data, daily feedback to
Student, de-escalation strategies and positive reinforcement. (Id.)

IEP goals and objectives were addressed within the Discovery Program in which the Student
remained enrolledi (Testimony of Special Education Teacher, B-9) The Discovery Program
is a staff-intensive program in a small group setting delivered on—site at East Windsor Middle
School. (Testimony of Special Education Teacher and Director of Special Education) There
are only 6 students, who are served by two tutors and a special education teacher. (Id.) A
therapeutic component of the program is delivered by the school social worker who works
with students enrolled in the program, both individually and in group work. (Testimony of
Social Worker) A Behavior Specialist also served as a consultant for Student’s program.
(Testimony of Assistant Principal)

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0452

19.

20.

21‘

22.

23‘

24.

25.

Although Student initially seemed to buy into the program, he almost immediately
disengaged from it. (Testimony of Special Education Worker and Director of Special
Education) The Discovery Program employs a points system in which points are earned for
targeted behavior. (Id.) A student who earns a certain number of points over a speciﬁed
amount of time may earn his way back into regular education classes. (Id.) To date, Student
has not earned sufﬁcient points on a consistent basis to earn back a regular education class.
(Testimony of Special Education Teacher; B-13)

Student’s behavior in the Discovery Program relative to other peers in the program was so
divisive and disruptive to the group that staff determined it was necessary to divide the group
of students into two different age groups, so that Student was usually alone or with one other
student (Testimony of Special Education Teacher and Director of Special Education) This
was the ﬁrst time in the history of the program this step was necessary, (Id.)

Student’s on—task academic time within the Discovery Program has been observed to be less
than 50%. (Testimony of Director of Special Education) Student spends a signiﬁcant amount
01’ the academic day sleeping and physically removing himself from the academic setting, by
leaving his assigned work area within the classroom or leaving the room he is assigned to be
in and wandering the building. (Testimony of Special Education Teacher and Director of
Special Education)

Student’s behavior has included sexually inappropriate comments toward staff. (Testimony
of Special Education Director) Student regularly engages in mean-spirited and highly
personal verbal attacks on staff and other students. (Testimony of Special Education Teacher
and Director of Special Education)

Despite the identiﬁed need for counseling, Student does not take advantage of the counseling
support offered. (Testimony of School Social Worker) Student does not participate in
counseling sessions, and is often non-communicative with the School Social Worker 01'
avoids her by walking a distance apart from her when she attempts to do her morning cheek~
in with him. (Id.)

On February 27, 2014, a PPT meeting was held to conduct a manifestation determination,
address behavioral concerns, and review or revise the IEP. (B-1 1) The school based team
determined that the Student’s behavior was not a manifestation of his disability and
recommended a 45—day diagnostic placement to conduct a clinical psychological evaluation.
(Id.) Parent refused the diagnostic placement recommendation and the Student continued to
be educated in the Discovery Program pursuant to the existing IEP. (Id.)

Student’s behavior continued to deteriorate over the 2013-2014 academic year. (Testimony
ot‘Director of Special Education, Special Education Teacher and School Social Worker) Of
particular concern was an incident in which the Student left his assigned work area and
roamed the hallways of the school, eventually inserting himself into a music class that was in
session, in which Student was not enrolled. (Testimony of Special Education Teacher)
Student refused repeated attempts to redirect him and required several staff members be
diverted from other tasks to monitor him during this time. (Id.) Other incidents included

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0452

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

insubordination 01‘staff by refusing to go to locations as directed by staff on February 27,
2014 and a physical altercation with another student on March 21, 2014, in which Student
slapped another student, in front of staff, aﬁer the staff member had broken up a ﬁght. (B—
16) In addition, Student has produced writing samples containing troubling violent imagery.
(B—lS)

On April 9, 2014, another PPT meeting was held to conduct a manifestation determination
and address the continuing behavioral concerns regarding the Student. (B—l4) The school
based team determined that the Student’s behavior was not a manifestation of his disability
and recommended a 45-day diagnostic placement to conduct a clinical psychological
evaluation. (Id.) Parent again refused the diagnostic placement recommendation and in
response the Board ﬁled a Special Education Due Process Hearing Request. (HO-l, B-14)

The Board’s recommended diagnostic placement was the Springdale School in I-Iolyoke,
MA. (Testimony of School Behavioral lnterventionist) The Springdale School has the
resources to provide Student with a strong academic program and the clinical psychological
evaluation being requested by the Board. (Id.)

Student has undergone a signiﬁcant transition in his living arrangements with a switch of
primary custodial parent. (Testimony of Parent) Student’s medication may not have been
consistently given to Student in the past, but is now being administered consistently by
Parent. (Id.)

Student was able to reach a level 3, the daily goal under the Discovery Program point system,
on certain days in April 2014. (P-l) However, Student was not able to sustain this
achievement and there are other days in April in which Student did not engage in his program
at all at various points throughout the day. (B—l6)

Student is still not accessing the supports available to him on a consistent basis. (Testimony
of School Social Worker, Special Education Teacher, and Special Education Director)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

As an initial evaluation and eligibility determination has already been made by the Board, the
clinical psychological evaluation diagnostic placement being proposed is a request for a
reevaluation. 34. C.F.R. § 300.303 provides in relevant pait that: “A public agency must
ensure that a reevaluation of each child with a disability is conducted in accordance with §§
300.301 through 300.31 1 (1) If the public agency determines that the educational or related
services needs, including improved academic achievement and functional performance, of
the child warrant a reevaluation 0r (2) 1f the child’s parent or teacher requests a
reevaluation.”

Compelling and strong evidence has been presented that Student is currently available for
learning, at best, only 50% ol‘the time he is in school. This is despite signiﬁcant and
sustained intervention in the form of a highly structured program with a high student to staff

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0452

ratio. Achievement and cognitive testing indicate that the Student should be accessing the
regular curriculum and succeeding with minimum suppotts. The discrepancy between the
Student’s abilities and performance clearly suppott a ﬁnding that a reevaluation of the
Student is necessary, because the IEP developed by the School based on the existing
evaluations is not facilitating progress toward the existing goals and objectives.

3. Pursuant to its obligation under 34. C.F.R. § 300.300 (c), Board sought to obtain Parent’s
consent for a diagnostic placement so that a clinical psychological evaluation ofStudent
could be conducted.

4. Parent refused to provide consent for the diagnostic placement at the two PPT meetings when
the recommendation was made. While parental consent for a reevaluation is required under
34 C.F.R. § 300.300 (0) (i), the Board has the option ofi'equesting parent’s consent be
overridden by using the consent override procedures set out in 34. CPR. § 300300 (a) (3),
which permit the Board to utilize the due process procedures under 34 C.F.R. §§ 300.507
through 300.516.

5. The Board is seeking a diagnostic placement of the Student in accordance with R.C.S. A.
Section 10-76(1—14 (b) which permits a trial placement for diagnostic purposes as patt of a
reevaluation of a child. A diagnostic placement is permissible where additional data is
needed in order to develop Student’s LEP. (Id.) The diagnostic placement is a method of
evaluation, not educational placement. See’ e.g., West Hartford Board ofEducarion, OCR
01—86—1016, 352 IDELR 300(1986). Where a parent does not consent to a diagnostic
placement, hearing ofﬁcers may order the diagnostic placement without the consent of the
parent, as it is a method of evaluation. In Re Student with Disability, 41 IDELR 143 (2004).

6. The Board’s request for a diagnostic placement lasting 45 days violates R.C.S.A. Section 10-
76d—l4 (b) which limits the duration of diagnostic placements to 40 days.

7. While the Student has evidenced minor improvement over the past month, it is not of
sufﬁcient duration or consistency to overcome the clear and pressing need for a better
understanding of why this Student is struggling to receive even a minimal beneﬁt from his
educational environment.

8. Despite the intensive nature of the Discovery Program and Student’s Behavior Intervention
Plan, Student has not made meaningful progress on his IEP goals and objectives. Student
does not evidence the sustained engagement necessary to “graduate” from the program and
transition back into the regular education program. It is clear that despite the good faith
efforts of school staff, the Board is struggling to fully understand and meet the Student’s
needs. The Board is rightfully seeking more information so that Student’s IEP can be revised
to provide Student with a greater opportunity to learn and experience success. Under these
circumstances, a clinical psychological evaluation in a diagnostic placement is appropriate.

May 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0452

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1 .

The Board’s most recent recommendation of a diagnostic placement of Student was
appropriate.

The Board is ordered to immediately convene a PPT meeting to develop an interim IEP that
sets out the speciﬁc conditions for the diagnostic placement and limits such placement to 40
school days.

The Board is ordered to place the Student in Springdale School in Holyoke, Massachusetts
for the purposes of a diagnostic placement lasting no more than 40 school days, during which
time a clinical psychological evaluation shall be conducted. Placement at the Springdale
School, shall be contingent on that program having an Extended School Year program so that
the evaluation can proceed and be completed without delay. In the event that the Springdale
School does not have an Extended School Year program, the Board is directed to identify and
place the Student in a program equivalent to the Springdale School in terms of staff
qualiﬁcations that does have an Extended School Year program as soon as possible. The
Board shall arrange and pay for Student’s transportation to and from the Student’s placement.

The Board is ordered to comply with the deadlines and requirements set out in R.C.S.A. 10—
76d—14(b) for reconvenjng a PPT before the end of the diagnostic program in order to review
and revise the child’s IEP as necessary.

