June 5, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14~0490

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Enﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalfol‘ the Surrogate Parent: Attorney Joel Rottner
Skelley Rottner, PC
433 South Main Street, #305
West Hartford, CT 061 10

Appearing on behalfof the Board: Attorney Christine L. Chinni
Chinm' & Meuser LLC
30 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Was the Student’s behavior, which resulted in disciplinary action by the Board, a
manifestation ofhis disability?

2. Was the conduct that resulted in the disciplinary action, a result of the Board’s failure to
properly implement the Student’s individualized education plan (IEP)?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Other Health Impaired and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate
public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabi1ities Education Improvement Act
(IDEA) 20 U.S,C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Surrogate Parent did not agree with the PPT’s
determination that the conduct that resulted in the disciplinary action was not a result of the Student’s
disability. The Surrogate Parent requested that the conduct be determined as a manifestation of his
disability. The Board refused the Surrogate Parent’s request. The Surrogate Parent requested an
expedited hearing.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on May 6, 2014 and a pre—hearing conference was scheduled
for May 9, 2014. The Board received notice of the request for an expedited due process hearing on May
5, 2014‘ The Parent’s attorney was not available at the scheduled time; a phone message was left and an
electronic transmission was sent. The Board’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter was
resolved. The Surrogate Parent’s attorney contacted the hearing ofﬁcer, as requested in the electronic
transmission, and stated that the matter had not been resolved. The attorney requested a pre-hearing
conference at an alternate time.

June 5, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No‘ 14-0490

On May 9, 2014, the parties informed the hearing ofﬁcer that they were able to execute an agreement and
the Surrogate Parent’s attorney withdrew the matter without prejudice. The mailing date for the Final
Decision and Order is June 17, 2014,

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

If the local or regional board ofeducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board ofEducation shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
count by either patty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Comtecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

\

”’f r/‘

{\ Hearing Offx‘grESiguamre

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

