October 3, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-01 10

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Newtown Board ofEducation

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Andrew Feinstein
86 Denison Avenue
Mystic, CT 06355

Appearing on behalfol‘the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin

Bei'chem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: ‘ Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:
1. Whether the Board’s programs for the Student for the 201 1-12 and 2012—13 school years were
appropriate;
2‘ Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for the 2013~14 school year is
appropriate;

3. Whether the Parents’ unilateral placement of the Student at Villa Maria for the 2013—14 school
year is appropriate and shall be reimbursed;

4. Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for the costs of the FM system and IPad.

5. Whether the Parents shall be reimbursed for the Student’s central auditory processing
reevaluation, the speech and language evaluation, the neuropsychological evaluation and the
independent education evaluation;

61 Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

This hearing request was received by the Board on August 14, 2013, and a preheating conference
convened on August 20, 2013‘ At the preheating conference the attorneys for both parties
conﬁrmed that the parties had agreed to mediate this case.

The Parents’ request for an extension of the mailing date of the decision was granted so that the
parties had sufficient time to settle this case through mediation, and a hearing date of October 17,
2013 was scheduled. Prior to the ﬁrst hearing date, the Parents’ attorney submitted notiﬁcation that
the paities settled at mediation and that the request for due process was withdrawn with prejudice.
Therefore, this matter is dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

 

Lf the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the heating decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either pany in accordance with the provisions of Section 4- 1 83, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

 

