March 17, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0312

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Westpmt Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Belman Moses
Berchem Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Attorney via letter dated December 9, 2013.1 It was received by Board of Education’s
(“BOE’S”) Attorney on December 9, 2013. The 30—day resolution period ended January 8. The
original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was Febmary 22.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on January 13. Attorney Laviano appeared
on behalf of Student and Attorney Moses appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issues were
identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education

during the 2011—12 school year?

2. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education

during the 2012-13 school year?

3. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student a free appropriate public education

during the 2013-14 school year?

4. If the answer to any of the above lssues One through Three is in the afﬁrmative, what

shall be the remedy?

Via e-mail on February 15, Student’s Attorney notiﬁed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that
mediation was scheduled for March 24 and requested an extension of the mailing date to allow
the parties to mediate. In support of the request for extension, Student’s Attorney represented
that Student is unilaterally place and doing well and that there is no harm posed to him by an
extension. She also indicated that Student’s Parent would withdraw the request for hearing if the
mediation date is too far out to extend the mailing date.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer notiﬁed the parties that the regulations permit one extension of up to
30 days for settlement purposes and that such extension would move the mailing date to March
24, the same date as the scheduled mediation. Aﬁer fully considering the positions of the parties,
the request for an extension was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order

‘ All dates are 2014 unless otherwise indicated.

 

extended until March 24. The Hearing Ofﬁcer noted that Student’s Attorney can decide whether
to withdraw the case, seek another extension to accommodate hearing dates after the mediation,
or select hearing dates and indicated that if some action was not taken by March 14, the case
would be dismissed for failure to prosecute. The parties have made no such requests to the
Hearing Ofﬁcer.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light ol‘lhe above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board ofcducation or the uniﬁed school district rcsponsible for

,‘ ' ‘ 'providing spacial education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer withm ﬁﬁccn days aﬁcr
receipt thereof, the Stafe Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

_ Appeals from the hearing decision of the healing ofﬁcer may bemade to state or federal
court by either party in accprdance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connccﬁcut
Gonna] Statutes, and Title 20 United States‘Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

éarin armg Ofﬁcer Signature

GM \5 c. semww

V Heéiing Ofﬁcer Name in Print ‘

signpage doc (ho disk)-
4/1/04

”Mum ‘mgu.;~;cu' *-- - w ;-,.-,_-_

