January 31, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0334

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Shelton Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chinm' & Meuser LLC
30 Avon Meadow Lane

Avon, CT 06001
Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Is the Board’s speech and language evaluation appropriate? If not;
2. Is the Student entitled to a speech and language evaluation at the Board’s expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Other Health Impaired and is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities
Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et
seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rejected the speech and language
evaluation performed by the Board. The Parents requested an independent speech and language
evaluation. The Board refused the Parents request and ﬁled for a due process hearing.

An impaltial hearing officer was appointed on January 7, 2014 and a pre-hearing conference was
held on January 24, 2014. At the pre-hearing conference, the Parents informed the hearing
ofﬁcer that they were not seeking an independent evaluation at this time and sent an electronic
transmission confirming the withdrawal. The Board’s attorney also sent an electronic
transmission stating that based on the Parents’ electronic transmission, they were withdrawing
their request for due process without prejudice.

The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is February 21, 2014.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is dismissed without prejudice.

If the local or regional board of education 01‘ the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁeen days aﬁer
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
couﬁ by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

;, ,/

 

 

Hearing OfﬁéﬁSignature

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

