June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Voluntown Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Sally Zanger
CT Legal Rights Project
PO Box 351
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey
Kainen, Escalera and McHale
21 Oak Street
Hartford, CT 06109

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education appropriately assess the Student’s community
integration and independent 1iving skills?

2. If not, what is or are the appropriate remedy 01' remedies?

Did the Board of Education provide appropriate transition services for the

Student from January 17, 2012 to the present?

4. If not, what is or are the appropriate remedy or remedies?

Does the Student require additional transition services for which the Board of

Education is responsible?

6. If [so], what is 01' are the appropriate remedy or remedies?

b.)

{J}

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in this matter on January
17, 2014, This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case on January 17, 2014,
A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on J anuary 28, 2014. Attorney Sally
Zanger appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey appeared on
behalf of the Board of Education (Board). Hearings were scheduled for March 19, 2014
and March 21,2014.

On February 4, 2014, the Student submitted a request for an 01'derof“Stay Put”,
pursuant to 34 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section 300.518 (a) and Section
10-76h—17 (a) of the Regulations of Comiecticut State Agencies (R.C.S.A.) The Hearing
Ofﬁcer responded on February 13, 2014, ordering the Board to continue Student’s then-

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0346

current placement at the EASTCONN Northeast Regional Program (EASTCONN)
pending the completion of the hearing.

During the hearing on March 19, 2014 the hearing scheduled for March 21, 2014 was
cancelled. Further, the parties agreed that additional hearings would be necessary in
order to afford due process to both the Student and the Board. Additional hearings were
scheduled for April 10, 2014, April 23, 2014, April 25, 2014 and April 28, 2014.

During the hearing on April 10, 2014 and in a brief dated April 18, 2014, the Student
moved to add the issue of an extended year program for the summer of 2014 to the case.
The Board opposed that motion and the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer denied it on April 22,
2014.

On March 20, 2014, the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision
was extended to May 2, 2014. At the hearing on April 25, 2014, an additional request
for an extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision was
granted to May 30, 2014 Finally, at the last hearing, on April 28, 2014, a further
extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision was
granted to June 27, 2014.

The Student’s witnesses were the Mother; the Father; the Student; Andre Bessette, the
Student’s former therapist; Elaine Lee, the Board’s Special Education Director; Cynthia
Mason-Jones, a Treatment Coordinator with the Connecticut Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services (DMHAS); and the following staff members from
EASTCONN: Heather Cymbala, Karen McElroy, Kurt Mias, Amy Margeloni, Graham
Chamberlain, and Mitchel Sibley-Jett.

The Student submitted proposed exhibits numbered Exhibits P—l to P-55. Objections to
Exhibit P—44, page 6 of Exhibit P—47, Exhibit P—49, Exhibit P-SO, pages 1, 2 and 6 of
Exhibit P-53 and Exhibit P-54 were sustained. Proposed Exhibit P-48 was withdrawn.
The remaining Student exhibits were entered as full exhibits.

The Board’s witness was Elaine Lee, Special Education Director for the Voluntown
Board of Education.

The Board submitted proposed exhibits numbered Exhibits B—l through B-47, which
were entered as full exhibits except that the Student’s social security number was
redacted from Exhibit 8—41.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

To the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually
represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. For
reference, see SAS Institute Inc. v, H, Computer Systems, Inc., 605 FrSupp. 816 (MD.
Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Arm F. v. Ca/allen Independent School District, 835 F.Supp.
340, 201DELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993).

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

SUMMARY:

A Student with a disability category of Emotional Distress claimed entitlement to
continued transition services after his high school graduation with a standard diploma.
The Student’s IEP, including his transition plan, met the standards of Rowley for a free
appropriate public education in that it was reasonably designed to afford the Student
educational beneﬁt.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(C.G.S.) Section 10-7611 and related regulations, 20 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section
1415(1) and related regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative
Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), CTG.S. Sections 4-176e to 4-178, inclusive, Section 4—181a
and Section 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary
evidence and testimony of witnesses, 1 ﬁnd the following facts:

1. The Student was born on October 13, 1995, and is now eighteen years of age.
He attended the Board’s public elementary school in the mainstream from the foulth
through the eighth grades. Exhibit P-22 p. 2.

2. The Student began to exhibit signiﬁcant psychiatric illness in about the sixth
grade. Exhibit P-2 p. 2. Although he completed his academic work satisfactorily, there
were concerns about his attendance and social, emotional and behavioral functioning.
Exhibit B-13 p. 2. He was identiﬁed as a student eligible to receive special education
and related services under the category of Emotional Disturbance in the ninth grade.
Exhibit B~13 pt 1.

3. The Student was initially placed in the self contained ACES Program at the
Norwich Free Academy for ninth grade. Norwich Free Academy is one of the
designated high schools for students from Voluntown. Exhibit B-13 p. 1. Testimony of
Dr. Elaine Lee (Lee).

4. Despite his relatively restrictive placement in the ACES Program, the Student
suffered several emotional crises in the ninth grade and was hospitalized several times
during the 2009-2010 School Year. Exhibit P-22 p. 1.

5. The Connecticut Department 01‘ Children and Families (DCF) placed the Student
at Hillcrest Education Center, a residential therapeutic facility in Massachusetts, in June
2010. Exhibits P—22 p. 1 and B-13 p. 1. He stayed there until the end of December
2010, when the Voluntown Board of Education placed him at EASTCONN, a public
therapeutic day treatment school operated by the area’s educational service center.

3

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0346

6. Except for a few hospitalizations, the Student matriculated at EASTCONN
continuously from December 2010 through J anualy 17, 2014, when this case was ﬁled.

7. EASTCONN is a very small program. 113 high school section includes only
about twelve students in two classrooms. (Cymbala).

8. The Student met a good deal of academic and behavioral success at
EASTCONN. (Cymbala).

9. The Board takes the position that the Student graduated from high school on 01‘
before January 17, 2014 and that, if not for the Stay Put order, special education and
related services would have been discontinued at that time.

10. The Student has been diagnosed with a multitude ot‘conditions over the years.
(Mother). More recently, he was described as follows:

[H]e has average overall intellectual ability; his verbal comprehension skills are
slightly above average, while his processing speed is slightly below average . . . .
[He] continues to display signiﬁcant social, emotional and behavioral concerns.
He displays many of the DMS-IV TR criteria for Depression, . . . [and] struggles
with feelings of low self—esteem, social stress and poor self—conﬁdence. He has
difﬁculties getting along with peers and oﬁen displays a tendency to withdraw
and isolate himself from social relationships. While he struggles to socialize
with others his age, [he] gets along well with both children and adults.

Exhibit B—13 p. 3.

11. As required by the IDEA, the Student’s Planning and Placement Team (PPT)
began transition planning for him by his sixteenth birthday. These activities are
described below for the two years before this case was ﬁled.

J unior Year (201 1 —2012 School Year)

12. At the March 22, 2012 meeting, during his Junior Year, the Student’s PPT
identiﬁed his Vocational/Transition strengths as “[c]0mmitted to building an excellent
work history, willing to learn new tasks, complete his work assignments, and he enjoys
mentoring and working with elementary age children.” His concerns/needs were that he
“can be negatively inﬂuenced by peers, which can result in his making poor behavior
choices which inhibit his internship participation. He needs to improve upon his work
presentation and hygiene.” The impact of his disability was to create “[d]ifﬁculty
maintaining appearance and lack of organizational skills [that] may affect his current
and future employment aspirations.” Exhibit B-7 p. 5.

13. The PPT described the Student’s Activities of Daily Living strengths as:
“[m]oney skills and computer skills.” His concerns/needs were described as
“[0]rganization and application of self—care skills.” The impact of his disability was

4

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

identiﬁed as “[d]ifﬁculty maintaining appearance and organizational skills [that] may
affect his current and future employment aspirations.” Exhibit B—7 p. 5.

14. The Student’s Transition Goals and Objectives at the time of the March 22, 2012
meeting were as follows:

Post Secondary Education/TI'aining Goal:

Discover and/or acquire instruction and skills to transition to a two or four year
community college 01‘ trade school

Objectives:

1. Identify and print applications for two post-secondary options (4 year college or trade
school).

2. Complete applications for two post-secondary institutions and BRS if accepted.

3. Research and organize ﬁnancial aid materials for the two post-secondary institutions
of his choice.

Employment Goal:
Complete a series ofactivities in order to prepare him to transition to competitive or

suppotted employment

Objectives:

Deﬁne interests and abilities to potential career and job opportunities in the Early
Childhood Education ﬁeld in written form, with staff assistance.

Identify primary and secondaly career goals comparing qualiﬁcations necessary for
success in such occupations with his own abilities in written form, with staff assistance.
Identify attitudes and behaviors necessary for job success in written form, with staff
assistance.

Independent Living Goal:
Acquire the necessary daily living skills to allow for independent functioning in a

variety of environments (home, vocational and community)

Objectives:

Given a staff prompt, . . . will maintain and comb hair prior to leaving for his work
placement,

Given a staff prompt, . . . will change into appropriate work clothes prior to leaving for
his job placement.

Independently operate the washer and dryer.

Exhibit B-7,

15. The Student’s Post—School Outcome Goals on March 22, 2012 were as follows:
Postsecondary Education or Training: to “attend college or trade school if ﬁnancial
funding is available”;

Employment: to “acquire part time competitive employment”;

Independent Living Skills: to “continue living with his parents or maintain an
apartment.”

Exhibit B—7 p. 6.

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

16. During his J unior Year, the Student received 17.25 hours per week of academic
instruction and .75 hour per week of counseling. Included was a course entitled
“Transition to Success II”. In addition, he had 10 hours per week of
vocalional/transition instmction, also called “work study” 01‘ “internship” in a
community based setting. Exhibit B—7 p. 19 and Exhibit B-23 p. 2.

17. At that time, the Student was projected to graduate at the end of the 2012—2013
School Year. Exhibit B-7 p. 20. His criteria for exiting, or discontinuing, special
education was “[a]bility to succeed in Regular Education without Special Education
Support.” Exhibit B-7 p. 18.

18. The Student did well in his transition endeavors during his Junior Year. It was
repoﬂed to the PPT that he “has an excellent work record. Is now working in a day care
center and is doing extremely well. The employer would like him to work as many
hours as possible. . . . Exhibit B-7 p. 2. His level of effort was consistently at least
“Satisfactory.” He earned a ﬁnal grade of A- for his work study at a day care center, and
passed his Transition to Success course. Exhibit P-28 p. 1.

Senior Year (2012~2013 School Year)

19. At the December 17, 2012 meeting during his Senior Year, the Student’s PPT
identified his Vocational/Transition strengths nearly identically as it had six months
earlier: “[c]ommittecl to planning future, willing to learn new tasks, complete his work
assignments, and enjoys mentoring and working with elementary age children.” His
concerns/needs were “[m]aintaining a clean work area.” The impact of his disability was
worded slightly differently, as “[d]ifﬁculty maintaining organizational skills and
interpersonal relationships that may affect his current and future employment
aspirations.” Exhibit B-15 p. 6.

20. The PPT described the Student’s Activities of Daily Living strengths as:
“[m]oney skills and computer skills.” His concerns/needs were described as
“[0]i‘ganization and application of functional skills.” The impact of his disability was
identiﬁed as “[d]ifﬂcu1ty maintaining organizational skills may affect his current and
future employment aspirations.” Exhibit B-15 p. 6.

21. The Student’s Transition Goals and Objectives were:

Post Secondary Education/Training Goal:
Research two or four year community college or trade schools as demonstrated by
mastery of the objectives below:

Objectives:

a) [R]esearch Lincoln College and an additional community college, b) print and
organize information on each school in a binder, c) complete a compare and contrast
chart (Lincoln College vs. other school) and (:1) complete a pro’s and con’s list for each
establishment.

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

[R]equest and obtain two letters of reference from past employers.
Given assistance from the vocational coordinator, . . . complete the Senior Checklist in
an effort to obtain documents necessary for employment.

Employment Goal:
Complete a series ofactivities to prepare . . . to transition to competitive or suppoxted

employment as demonstrated by mastery of the objectives below:

Objectives:

Given assistance from the Vocational Coordinator . . . a) create an updated resume, and
b) complete a personal information form, and 0) save both documents 011 a thumb drive.
[C]0mplete a series of 5 interview classes and successfully demonstrate mastery of skills
by an average rating of 80% 01' better given 2 mock interviews.

Given staff support, . . . inquire about the possibility of summer employment at his
current worksite.

Independent Living Goal:
Acquire the necessary daily living skills to allow for independent functioning in a

variety of environments (home, vocational and community).

Objectives:

Given a gestural prompt and Visual reminder, . . . 1) update agenda, 2) clean up after
lunch, and 3) completed [sic] end of the day clean-up checklist.

Given a calculator, . t . maintain a checkbook register as demonstrated by averaging 90%
given 15 trials

[C]omprehend information about the Connecticut Driver’s Manual as demonstrated by
an averaging [sic] 80% given 10 trials.

Exhibit B-15.

22. The Student’s Post—School Outcome goals were:

Postsecondary Education or Training: to “attend Lincoln College of New England to
study Mortuary Science”;

Employment: to “obtain competitive employment”;

Independent Living Skills: to “obtain . . . drivers license."

Exhibit B-15 p. 7.

23. During his Senior Year (2012—2013), the Student received 17.25 hours per week
of academic instruction and .75 hour per week of counseling. included were a course
entitled Transition to Success 11 and a course entitled Consumer Math. He now had 12
hours per week of vocational/transition instmction (work study/intemship), in a
community based setting. Exhibit B-15 p. 19, and Exhibit 13—23 p. 2.

24. At the December 17, 2012 meeting the Student’s PPT team discussed that
representatives of EASTCONN recommended he graduate in J une 2013, as he would

7

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order l4~0346

have a sufﬁcient number of high school credits to graduate at that time. The Student
indicated that he “would like another year @ NE Regional.” At that time, the Student’s
Exit Criteria continued to he “[a]bility to succeed in Regular Education without Special
Education Support.” Exhibit B-lS p. 14.

25. The Student was still working at the day care center under the work study
program. He had decided to include mentoring younger students at EASTCONN as part
of his senior project, and he was exploring Moitua1y Sciences as a possible career.
Exhibit B—15, p. 3. His level of effort was consistently rated as at least “Good” and he
was earning a grade of B+ for his work study at the day care center. He was passing his
Transition to Success course. Exhibit B—ll p. 1.

26. At the April 8, 2013 meeting near the end of his Senior Year the Student’s PPT
identiﬁed more Vocational/Transition strengths than it had in December: “[c]omitted to
planning future, willing to learn new tasks, complete his work assignments, and enjoys
mentoring and working with elementary age children, self-starter, able to work
independently when presented with familiar tasks.” His concerns/needs were
“[i]nterview skills, knowledge ofBSA requirements, organizations [sic] of documents
needed to obtain employment.” The impact of his disability was updated, now expressed
as “[d]ifﬁculty maintaining organizational skills and interpersonal relationships that may
affect his current and future employment aspirations. Anxiety with unfamiliar staff,
situations, place may negatively impact work performance. Processing speed requires
explicit directions. Extra processing time.” Exhibit B-35 p. 5.

27. The PPT again described the Student’s Activities of Daily Living strengths as:
“[m]oney skills and computer skills.” His concerns/needs were now described as
“[r]ecording homework assignments, ability to maintain checkbook register.” The
impact of his disability was identiﬁed as “[d]ifﬁculty maintaining organizational skills
may affect his current and future employment aspirations. . . . processing speed requires
receiving clear, concise, explicit directions, difﬁculty focusing on multi-tasking, and
needs extra time to process.” Exhibit B—35 p. 17.

28. The Student’s Transition Goals and Objectives were now described as follows:

Post Secondary Education/Training Goal:
[R]esearch two or four year community college or trade schools as demonstrated by
mastery of the objectives below.

Objectives:

[C]omplete four Basic Skill Assessment (BSA) practice tests, averaging 80% accuracy
given no more than one opportunity to correct.

[R]equest and obtain two letters of reference from past employers. He will scan and
save references on a thumbdrive with staff assistance.

Given assistance from staff, the Student will complete the identiﬁed items on the Senior
Checklist in an effort to obtain documents necessary for employment.

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

Employment Goal:
Complete a series of activities to prepare him to transition to competitive or supponed

employment as demonstrated by mastery of the objectives below:

Objectives:

Given assistance from staff, the Student will a) create an updated resume, and b)
complete a personal information form, c) save both documents on a thumb drive, and d)
e—mail documents to self.

Complete a series of 5 intewiew classes and successfully demonstrate mastery of skills
by an average rating of 80% or better given 2 mock intewiews.

Pa1ticipate in a potential employer and vocational coordinator meeting to determine
speciﬁcs of employment offer, and record information on template provided by
coordinator.

Independent Living Goal:
Acquire the necessary daily living skills to allow for independent functioning in a

variety of environments (home, vocational and community) as demonstrated by mastery
of the objectives below:

Objectives:

a) Record homework assignments from QVCC in a given assignment notebook, b) bring
the notebook back to NRP to discuss with staff, c) ask for help when needed on the
assignments, and/or d) download application to phone that can record homework and
substitute for assignment notebook.

Given a calculator application on his phone 01‘ calculator in isolation, . . . will maintain a
mock checkbook register as demonstrated by averaging 90% of given 15 trials.
Demonstrate comprehension of information about the Connecticut Driver’s Manual as
demonstrated by averaging 80% given 10 assignments.

Exhibit P—35.

29. At the time of the April 8, 2013 PPT meeting, the Student was still working at
the day care center under the work study program, and the day care center was interested
in doubling his work hours for the summer. Exhibit P-35, p. 2. His Vocational
Coordinator repoﬁed that the Student is a “strong, reassuring and friendly presence for
the children” at the day care and that he “is respected by staff and enjoys great
popularity with the children.” The Student, however, was struggling to maintain focus
at work and had not yet mastered good hygiene: “he often wears the same outfit most
days (to work and school) even when that outﬁt is dirty and stained.” Exhibit P-39.

30. The Student was also “doing very well” in the classroom and was “working
driver’s ed manual, doing SAT prep, Math life skills, has completed Community Project.
Has completed all CAPT Testing.” Exhibit P-35, p. 2. His level of effort was
consistently rated as at least “Good.” He was earning a grade of B- in his Consumer
Math course and he was earning a grade of B+ for his work study at a day care center.
He was passing his Transition to Success course. Exhibit P—20 p. 1.

9

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

3 1. At the meeting on April 8, 2013, the PPT team “determined that [the Student]
would remain at EASTCONN until the end of the semester in January 2014” in as much
as he had “enough high school credits [to graduate] but could beneﬁt from additional
vocational and post secondary goal completion.” Exhibit B—35 p. 2.

32. The PPT documentation for the April 8, 2013 meeting changed the Student’s
Exit Criteria to: “Graduation” and his projected graduation date was changed to the
2013-2014 School Year. Exhibit P-35 p. 13 and 15.

33. The PPT documentation for the April 8, 2013 meeting does not include any
reference to changing the Student’s Exit Criteria 01‘ his Graduation Date under its Prior
Written Notice section. Exhibit P-35 p. 3.

34. The Student’s program at EASTCONN continued in the Fall of2013, including
his work study position at the day care center. Since he had completed his high school
credit requirements, the Student was em‘olled in two credit courses at the local
community college. One course was taken on line (English), and the other
(Mathematics) in person at the college campus. Transportation to and from the college
was provided for this purpose. (Chamberlain; Cymbala).

35. The Student’s special education teacher contributed a signiﬁcant level of suppott
for the Student in his English class, but he worked relatively independently in the Math
course. He passed both courses. Exhibit P—38 p. 2. (Chamberlain).

36. The Student’s PPT met on December 12, 2013, a few weeks in advance of the
Student’s then proposed graduation date of J anuaiy 21, 2014. It was discussed that the
PPT had decided on April 8, 2013 that the Student would remain at EASTCONN until

J anuary 2014 even though he had sufﬁcient high school credits to graduate in June 2013,
and that he would “exit special education” in J anuary 2014. Representatives of DMHAS
attended the meeting and objected to the plan on behalf of the Student. DMHAS took
the position that the Student should not be exited from special education until he reaches
age 21. Exhibit P—38 p. 3.

37. The PPT documentation for the meeting 011 December 12, 2013 identiﬁes the
Student’s graduation of January 21, 2014 as an Action Proposed in the Prior Written
Notice section. Exhibit P—38 p. 3. The Prior Written Notice states that “[e]ducationa1
performance suppotts the proposed actions” and identiﬁes the “[o]the1' options
considered and rejected” as DMHAS’ View that the “[S]tudent should have lEP in place
until he is 21 .” The rationale for rejecting DMHAS’ position was that “Voluntown BOE
feels student has completed necessary vocational training.” Exhibit P-38 p. 3.

38. The PPT met again on J anuai‘y 14, 2014, this time with each party’s lawyer
present. Again, the discussion included the issue of graduation: “[t]he purpose of this
semester was to complete transition goals and objectives, to provide an opportunity for
[Student] to take 2 college courses and also to reach his 18Ih birthday at which time he
would be eligible for other suppoﬁ programs. [Student], having completed his

10

J um: 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

transitional goals and obj ectives will graduate from high school and receive his diploma
effective January 17, 2014. [Student’s] last day at EASTCONN will be Friday, January
17, 2014 and he will be exiled from special education on that date.” Exhibit P—41 p. 3.

39. Like the PPT documentation for the December 12, 2013 meeting, the PPT
documentation for the January 14, 2014 meeting identiﬁes the Student’s graduation 0n
Janualy 17, 2014 as an Action Proposed in the Prior Written Notice section. Exhibit F-
41 p. 3. The Prior Written Notice states that “[e]ducational performance supports the
proposed actions”. “[e]va1uation results suppoﬁ proposed actions”, “[p]1‘evious IEP
goals and objectives have been satisfactorily achieved” and “Student has met Exit
Criteria.” The documentation does not identify any “[o]ther options considered and

rejected” or express a rationale for rejecting other positions. Exhibit P—4l p. 3.

40. The Student and his parents were offered a copy of Procedural Safeguards in
Special Education at the December 12, 2013 and the January 14, 2014 meetings.
Exhibits P—38 p. 2 and P-4l p. 2.

411 The Student had completed all requirements for graduation from high school as
set forth under Connecticut law and the policies of the Voluntown Board of Education
by January 14, 2014. Stipulation 0fthe Parties.

42. The Student had completed work on all of his Transition Goals and Objectives
by January 14, 2014. (Chamberlain).

43. During his time at EASTCONN, the Student undertook or participated in several
formal “assessments” related to post high school training, employment, education and
independent living. Some of these are listed in the “Transition Assessment Resource
Manual ” published by The Connecticut Transition Task Force in collaboration with the
Connecticut State Department of Education Bureau of Special Education and the State
Education Resource Center (Manual). Exhibit B~43. The assessments used with the
Student include at least the following:

11

June 27, 2014

Namc/ Description

Exhibit No.

Vocational Staff Interview Ofstudent re:
Interview 1) Job interests and training/suppoﬁ

B-1 needs; 2) higher education interests

B-25 and needs; 3) living interests and
needs; 4) leisure/recreation interests
and needs

Harrington- Interest inventory that provides an

O’Shea Career assessment of career interests, job

Decision choices, school subjects, future plans,

making values and abilities.

System

Revised,

Level 1; B~2

Barriers to Self assessment to identify barriers to

Employment employment success in areas of
Success personal, physical and psychological,
Inventory career plamling, job seeking skills,

875 education and training and begin to
develop a plan to overcome them

I CANS Self Assessment of Listening Ability,
(Integrated Getting Along with Difﬁcult People,
Curriculum Determining Organizational Values
for Achieving

Necessary

Skills) 8-10

AGS Life
Skills Final
Mastery Test
B-23

Assessment connects interests with
related jobs, education, training
options and leisure activities

Career
Exploration
Inventory;
B—26

Harrington
O’Shea Career
Decision
Making
System Level
2

12

Final Decision and Order 14-0346

Date Listed in Manual
11/14/11 — No

01/11/12;

8/28/13

1/18/12 Yes

3/15/12 Yes

8/30/12 No

By 6/14/13

11/1/13 Yes

1/6/11 Yes

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

ICANS Personal Management 11/1/11

B-32

Canadian Self report of work abilities, learning 3/24/1 1 No
Career styles and work values

Exploration

B-47

See also Exhibit P-35 p. 6 (Sibley-Jett).

44. The formal assessments implemented with the Student covered many transition
topics and went well beyond mere interest inventories.

45. In addition to these formal assessments, the Student took several high school
courses at EASTCONN that focused on life aﬁer high school, including Transition to
Success, Consumer Mathematics and Jobs Academy. Presumably, he was assessed on
his acquisition of skills and knowledge in these courses. (Chamberlain).

46. Additionally, the Student spent a substantial amount of time during his high
school years in work-study positions at a hardware store and then a day care center in
the community. Although the Student’s experiences in these placements was not
formally assessed, his PPT Team did receive periodic reports concerning the Student’s
experiences, strengths and weaknesses in these settings. (Sibley-Jett).

47. The Student also attended at least some sessions of a guitar class at the local
community college during his Junior or Senior year. He then formally matriculated at
the community college for two courses - one on line — in the Spring of 2013. The
Student’s repons of these experiences, as well as his teachers’ direct involvement with
these experiences brought valuable information to the PPT concerning the Student’s
successes and challenges in community integration and post secondary education.
(Sibley—Jett; Chamberlain).

48. These informal and formal assessments covered a wide range of knowledge and
skills relating to training, education, employment and independent living. They were
used, in part, to generate individualized transition goals and objectives for the Student
and to fashion services in support of those goals.

49. For example, reports about the Student’s work study experience (and other
sources) during his J unior year revealed a need for improved hygiene. This was then
identiﬁed as an area of concerns/needs in his vocational/transition and activities of daily
living areas. Exhibit B-7 p. 5. Objectives were developed and implemented for the
Student to “maintain and comb hair prior to leaving for work”, “change into appropriate
work clothes”, “independently operate the washer and dryer” and “identif y attitudes and
behaviors necessary for job success.” Exhibit B—7 p. 11 and p.12.

13

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

50. Similarly, assessments revealed that the Student might have an interest in and
aptitude for a career in early childhood education. Accordingly, his objectives included
deﬁning career opportunities and abilities in the area of early childhood education.
Exhibit B-7 p. 111

51. Later in his career at EASTCONN, the PPT learned that the Student had an
interest in embalmjng. Accordingly, objectives were included for the Student to
research a nearby college offering “Mortuary Science.” A shadowing oppoﬂunity was
arranged for the Student at a mortuary, and he was taken to Visit the college campus.
(Sibley-Jett; Mother).

52. During his Senior year, a need was identiﬁed for the Student to become familiar
with the Basic Skills Assessment used by community colleges for placement. He was
given an objective to practice these examinations. When a concern was identiﬁed that
the Student was anxious with unfamiliar people, he was given objectives to practice job
interviews and meet with a potential employer and the vocational coordinator. Concerns
with organization and recording homework were addressed with a goal to maintain a
homework notebook 01‘ a phone application.

53. As far as the record reveals, no one ever suggested at a meeting or otherwise that
the PPT did not have sufﬁcient information about the Student’s transition strengths,
weaknesses 01‘ needs to develop appropriate goals and objectives 01‘ services for him.

54. A11 in all, the transition services provided to the Student included special
instruction by his teachers, related services (transpoﬁation to and from work study and
community college), community experiences (work study, community college
matriculation, mortuary college visit, mortuary Visit) and the development of post school
adult living objectives and acquisition of daily living skills (hygiene, consumer math,
drivers education manual). These were appropriate for the student at the time.

55. In the later months of 2013 and into early 2014, the Student experienced
increasing difficulties with memory. He lost his position at the day care center because
he could not remember to perform his assigned tasks. His anxiety has become so
signiﬁcant that he is unable to drive or even enter a retail store. He has not been able to
follow up on job applications and is not currently employed. (Mason Jones).

14

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0346

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

In Board ofEducation v. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982), the Supreme Court set out a two-
part test for determining whether a board of education has offered a student a free
appropriate public education (FAPE) in compliance with the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. Sections 1400 et seq (IDEA). The ﬁrst part is
whether there has been compliance with the procedural requirements of IDEA; and the
second part is whether the student’s individualized education program (IEP) is
reasonably calculated to enable the student to receive educational beneﬁts. Rowley, at
206—207.

A FAPE under the IDEA does not mean a "potential-maximizing education." (Id. at p.
197, fn. 21.) Instead, the IEP offered must be one that "confers some educational beneﬁt
upon the handicapped child." (Id. at. p. 200.)

Whether an IEP offers the student FAPE is assessed in light of information available at
the time it is developed; it is not judged in hindsight. Adams v. Oregon, 195 F.3d 1 141,
1 149 (9th Cir. 1999). "An IEP is a snapshot, not a retrospective." F uhrmann v. East
Hanover Board ofEducation, 993 F.2d 1031, 1036 (3rd Cir. 1993). It must be assessed
in terms ol‘what was objectively reasonable when the IEP was developed. (1d,)

While a student is entitled to both the procedural and substantive protections of the
IDEA, not every procedural violation is sufﬁcient to support a ﬁnding that a student was
denied a FAPE. Mere technical violations will not render an IEP invalid. (Amanda J v.
Clark County School District, 267 F.3d 877, 892 (9th Cir. 2001). In matters alleging a
procedural Violation, a due process hearing officer may ﬁnd that a child did not receive a
FAPE only if the procedural violation did any of the following: (1) impeded the child's
right to a FAPE; (2) signiﬁcantly impeded the parent's opportunity to palticipate in the
decision-making process; or (3) caused a deprivation of educational beneﬁts. W. G, v.
Board oth'ustees afTarget Range School District, 960 F.2d 1479, 1484 (9th Cir. 1992)

A parent who has had an opportunity to discuss a proposed IEP and whose concerns are
considered by the PPT team has palticipated in the IE? process in a meaningful way.
Fuhrmann v. East Hanover Board ofEducation, 993 Fi2d 1031, 1036 (3rd Cir. 1993).

Under Connecticut and federal law, a board of education’s duty to educate disabled
students ends with the earlier of a) the student’s high school graduation; b) the student’s
twenty-fn'st bilthday; or c) the student’s achievement of such other criteria as are
established by his PPT Team. 34 C.F.R. Section 300.102(a)(3)(i); C.G.S. Section 10-
76(d). [Nata Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies Section 10-76d—1(a)(4)
provides that for those students who have not graduated, special education and related
services shall be continued until the end offhe school year in the event that the child
turns miem‘y-(me during that school year'.]

High school graduation requirements are determined by state law and school district

policy. If a student with a disability meets all state and school district requirements for

award ot‘a regular high school diploma, he cannot be denied a diploma simply because
15

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

he has a disability. (Letter {0 Anonymous, 22 IDELR 456 (OSEP 1994); (Sammons v.
Polk County Sch. Bd, 45 IDELR 29 (11th Cir. 2006).

In this case, there is no dispute, and the patties stipulated, that the Student accomplished
all of the criteria necessary for him to graduate from high school by the end of June
2013. In particular, he earned all of the high school credits required for graduation
under state law as well as the under the policy of the Voluntown Public Schools.

Even where a student has met all requirements for high school graduation, however, a
school district may not graduate the student if the district has not provided the student
with a FAPE as required by the IDEA. Doe v. Marlborough Public Schools, 54 IDELR
283, 110 LRP 39223 (D Mass. 2010).

The decision to graduate a student is a “major change of placement” and triggers the
requirement that the school district convene a PPT meeting and give written prior notice
a reasonable time before actually graduating the student and discontinuing special
education and related services. 34 CPR. Section 300.503 (a)(l); Letter to Hagen-
Gilden, 24 IDELR 294 (OSEP 1996); Letter to Steinke, 21 IDELR 379 (OSEP 1994).
Such written prior notice must include a description of the action the school district
proposes, a description of the evaluation procedure, assessment, record 01' report used as
a basis for the action, a statement of procedural safeguards and sources for parents to
seek assistance, a description of other options considered and any other factors relevant
to the decision. 34 C.F.R. Section 300.503.

Failure to provide prior written notice or to conduct a PPT meeting may result in a
procedural violation of the IDEA if it impedes the child's right to a FAPE, signiﬁcantly
impedes the parent's opportunity to palticipate in the decision—making process, or causes
a deprivation of educational beneﬁts. W. G. v. Board of Trustees ofTaI'get Range School
District, 960 F.2d 1479, 1484 (9th Cir. 1992)

Here, although he did not claim procedural violations relating to graduation as an issue
in either the initial request for special education due process hearing 01‘ at the prehearing
conference, the Student now argues that the decision to graduate the Student was
improperly processed. This claim, even if had been properly raised in the case, is not
supported by the evidence or the law.

The Board did convene at least three PPT meetings — on April 8, 2013, December 12,
2013 and on J anuary 14, 2014 — where a discussion of the Student’s graduation took
place. Written Prior Notice was provided as part of the PPT documentation for the
meetings ofDecember 12, 2013 and January 14, 2014. Furthermore, any deﬁciencies in
the process or documentation clearly had no impact on either the Student’s FAPE 01' his
Parent’s opportunity to patticipate in the decision-making process. After all, the issue
was discussed as early as the April 8, 2013 meeting, and the Student brought
representatives of DMHAS with him to the December 12, 2013 and Januaiy 14, 2014
meetings specifically to advocate that the Student not be graduated 01' exited from
special education, but maintained in his then special education status until age 21. The
Student also brought his lawyer to the J anuary 14, 2014 meeting for the same purpose.
16

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

The Student’s graduation decision was, therefore, not a surprise. Nor were the Student’s
parents shut out of the process. Their voices were heard.

The IDEA requires school districts to provide transition goals and services, on an annual
basis beginning when the student turns sixteen:

[B]eginning not later than the ﬁrst IEP to be in effect when the child is 16, and
updated annually thereafter-

(aa) appropriate measurable postsecondary goals based upon age appropriate transition
assessments related to training, education, employment, and, where appropriate,
independent living skills;

(bb) the transition services (including courses ofstudy) needed to assist the child in
reaching those goals; . . .

20 U.S.C. Section 1414(d)(1)(A)(i)(VIII)(aa) and (bb); see also 34 C.F.R.
Section 300.320(b).

Students must be invited to PPT meetings when the team will be discussing transition
goals and services. If a student does not attend the meeting, the school district must
take other steps to ensure that the student's preferences and interests are considered, 34
C.F.R. Section 300.321(b); Gibson v, Forest Hills School District, 62 IDELR 261, 1 14
LRP 7352 (SD. Ohio 2014)

The term “Transition Services” is deﬁned as follows:

(a) Transition services Ineans a coordinated set of activities for a child with
a disability thati

(1) Is designed to be within a results—oriented process, that is focused on
improving the academic and functional achievement of the child with a
disability to facilitate the child's movement from school to post-school
activities, including postsecondary education, vocational education,
integrated employment (including supported employment), continuing and
adult education, adult services, independent living, or community
participation;

(2) Is based on the individual child's needs, taking into account the child’s
strengths, preferences, and interests; and includesﬁ

(i) Instruction;

(ii) Related services;

(iii) Community experiences;

(iv) The development of employment and other post—school adult living
objectives; and

(v) If appropriate, acquisition of daily living skills and provision of a
functional vocational evaluation

17

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

(b) Transition services for children with disabilities may be special
education, ifprovided as specially designed instruction, or a related service,
if required to assist a child with a disability to beneﬁt from special
education.

34 C.F.R. Section 300.43.

The Student claims here that the Board did not implement the correct “age appropriate
assessments” of the Student in the areas of community integration and daily living skills
and, therefore, did not provide appropriate transition sewices.

It is clear that a failure to perform any age appropriate transition assessments or a failure
to develop any transition goals violates the DEA. Carrie 1. v. Department ofEducation,
State of Hawaii, 869 F.Supp.2d 1225, 1244-45 (D. Haw. 2012); Dracut v. Bureau of
Special Education Appeals quass. Dept. afEIementm‘y and Special Ed, 737 F.
Supp.2d 35, 50—51(D. Mass. 2010); East Penn School District, Plaintiffv, Scott B., et al.,
Defendants, 29 IDELR 1058, 29 LRP 5231 (ED. Pa 1999).

Here, ofcourse, the Board did conduct a number of formal and informal transition
assessments and did develop and implement transition goals and services. The Board
used several relatively formal transition protocols, many of which can be found in a
“Transition Assessment Resource Manual ” published by The Connecticut Transition
Task Force in collaboration with the Connecticut State Department of Education Bureau
of Special Education and the State Education Resource Center (Manual). In the face of
evidence that any of the assessments used were not age appropriate, I conclude that at
least some “age appropriate” assessments were implemented. The assessments that were
implemented also cover issues such as the skills, training and aptitude associated with
particular jobs and how a student might go about selecting a particular career.

In addition to these more formal assessments, the Student’s PPT also had a panoply of
informal assessments of the Student’s acquisition of knowledge and skills impaited in
the several courses he took at EASTCONN focusing on vocational, employment and
independent living skills. The Student’s passing grades in these courses gives rise to an
inference that he was assessed on, and learned the material taught.

Additionally, the PPT had informal assessments of the Student’s work study experiences
at the hardware store and day care center as well as his college exposure experiences in
taking a high school guitar class on the community college campus and matriculating in
the two credit courses at the community college. Throughout his high school career, the
Student’s teachers and other PPT team members received reports on these experiences,
including the successes as well as the challenges. These experiences both allowed the
Student to practice community integration skills and allowed his PPT to assess his needs
in this area.

PPT meeting documentation included a briefdescription of the Student’s strengths and
concerns/needs in the areas of V0cational/Transitional and Independent Living. These

18

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0346

descriptions were surely based on all of the sources available to the PPT. Yet, as far as
the record reﬂects, no PPT member ever atticulated a need for more assessments or
more or different information about the Student’s strengths or weaknesses in the areas of
vocational, transitional, independent living, community integration or daily living skills.
And, while the Student’s failure to articulate a request or concern before ﬁling a request
for special education due process hearing is certainly not fatal to his claim, it does
support the credibility of other PPT members who believed the team had no need for
fulther assessment in these areas.

In conclusion, the evidence demonstrated that the Student’s PPT conducted adequate
assessments of the Student’s knowledge, skills, strengths, weaknesses and experiences
in the areas of community integration and daily living skills.

The evidence also reﬂected that the Student’s transition goals and services met the
relatively low standard for propriety set forth in Rowley. Although the Student’s
transition goals were not lofty, even for a student with emotional disabilities as severe as
his, they did focus on the areas required under the law — training/education, employment
and independent living.

The Student’s goals were also at least loosely based on information gathered through
formal and informal assessments of this particular Student, and focused on improving
his performance of academic and functional skills in order to facilitate his movement
from high school to post school activities. For instance, a palt 0f the Student’s plan
focused on becoming familiar and practicing the Basic Skills Assessment needed for
placement at the community college. Other objectives focused on preparing, gathering
and organizing various documents needed for a job search (resume, references)

As a whole, the Student’s transition program was reasonably calculated to afford more
than minimal educational beneﬁt at the time that it was designed. It was not perfect and
it may not have maximized the Student’s potential, but that is not what is required under
the law.

The Student’s main claim is not that the education provided to him was not appropriate,
but instead that there should have been more of it. He argues that his anxiety and other
emotional needs currently render him unable to participate in many essential activities of
daily living, such as following up on a job application, entering a retail store, or even
taking a cooking class with more than one other student. As he puts it, he needs a bridge
to support his journey from high school to post secondary school or work and
independent living.

Unfortunately, the Student’s claim is not founded in current law. Indeed, it runs counter
to the Supreme Court’s expression of the IDEA’s parameters in the seminal Rowley
case. The Board’s duty was to design and implement a program with the instruction,
services and accommodations necessary for the Student to acquire a public education.
Here, the program afforded the Student the opportunity to acquire the knowledge and

19

June 27, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14~0346

skills that the Board ofEducation and the State of Connecticut expect of all high school
graduates. The Student was not shut out of that education because of his disabilities.

The Student’s PPT could have provided more or different services to the Student and
could have spent more time imparting knowledge and skills that he will need for life
after high school. It could have hired a mentor or coach to alleviate the Student’s
anxiety by repeatedly exposing him to anxiety causing situations. Undoubtedly, these
are things that would beneﬁt the Student immensely. The Board was not, however,
obligated to do more than it did.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board of Education appropriately assessed the Student’s community
integration and independent living skills.

2. The Board of Education provided appropriate transition sewices for the Student
from J anualy 17, 2012 to the present.

3. The Student does not require additional transition services for which the Board
of Education is responsible.

20

If the local or regional board of education 01' the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code I415(i)(2)(A).

ﬂmﬁw

Hearing O‘Tﬁcer Signature

141010 FEIRD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

