May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

West Haven Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle C. Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Is the maintenance of the Student’s current placement substantially likely to result in
injury to the child 01‘ to others? If so;

2. Should the Board change the Student’s placement to a diagnostic placement, an
appropriate interim alternative educational setting (lAES), for not more than 45
school days?

JURISDICTION:

At the request of the hearing ofﬁcer the Board was requested to ﬁle a brief as to a hearing
ofﬁcer’s jurisdiction in the matter, under 34 CFR 300.532, where the Student has not been
identiﬁed as requiring special education and related services as stated in IDEA. The Parent was
also allowed to ﬁle a brief objecting or supporting the jurisdiction. The Parent did not ﬁle any
brief objecting or supporting the hearing ofﬁcer’s jurisdiction. The Board ﬁled their brief
(Hearing Ofﬁcer’s Exhibit1 No. 3) in a timely manner.

The hearing ofﬁcer agrees with the Board and ﬁnds that he does have jurisdiction in the matter.

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §10—
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedure Act, CGS §§4-l 766 to 4—178, inclusive,
and 4-181a and 4-186.

SUMMARY:
The Student has not been identiﬁed as being entitled to receive a free and appropriate public

education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act
(IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §l401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

I Hereafter Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibits will be noted as “H.O.” followed by the number of the exhibit.

l

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

At a manifestation determination review it was found that the disciplinary behavior that had
resulted in the disciplinaiy action was caused by and had a direct and substantial relationship to
the Student’s disability. The Board is of the opinion that maintaining the Student’s current
placement is substantially likely to result in injury to the child 01' to others and sought a 45 day
diagnostic placement at an IAES. The Parents refused and the Board ﬁled for an expedited
hearing pursuant to XDEA regulations at 34 CPR. §300.532_

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

An impaitial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on April 4, 2014; a pre-hearing conference was held
on Aril 9, 2014. A hearing date of April 29, 2014 was chosen by the parties. An additional
hearing date was needed to conclude the testimony and April 30, 2014 was chosen by the parties.
The Board presented Exhibits 1 thru 108 which were full exhibits of the hearing. The Parent
presented Exhibits 1 thin 5 and they were accepted as full exhibits of the hearing. The Parents
presented ﬁve witnesses and the Board presented ﬁve witnesses.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set foﬁh herein, which
reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supported
evidence in the record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. T0 the
extent that the summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of
law, they should be so considered and vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. v. S, & H. Computer
Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816 (M.D.Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F.v. Callallen Independent
School Board, 835 F.Supp. 340 (S.D.Tex. 1993).

The Board did not have school from April 21 to April 25, 2014. The date for the mailing of the
Final Decision and Order is May 14, 2014.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. At the November 16, 2010 PPT, the Student was exited from special education and
related services as stated in IDEA. The Student had a medical diagnosis of Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder; a 504 Plan under The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 was offered.
At this time, the Student attended a Magnet School in a neighboring district as a Student
whose nexus is West Haven. ( Board 2Exhibit N0. 23)

2. The Students eligibility determination for a 504 Plan was held on March 22, 201 1. At the
eligibility determination it was reported that the Student had behavior issues on the
school bus and a small bus was requested. The 504 team approved door to door
transportation in a small bus. The Student was found 504 eligible with the disabilities of
Childhood Dlsintegrative Disorder, ADHD, and Anxiety NOS/non-verbal disorder.

(13-30)

2 Hereaﬁer Board Exhibits will be noted as “B.” followed by the number of the exhibit.

2

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

3.

10

ll.

12.

The Parents withdrew the Student from the inter—distriet magnet school and enrolled him
in a neighborhood school. (8—43 and B-44).

Bridges Community Support Services in Milford, CT provided services to the Student for
poor social skills, sensory issues, difﬁculty managing feelings, auditory and visual
hallucinations, poor processing skills and difﬁculty with transitions. (B—3 1)

In September 2011, the Board requested that the Parents’ sign the consent forms for the
evaluations requested at the May 5, 2011 PPT meeting for eligibility under IDEA. On
September 15, 2011 the Parents informed the Board that they did not consent to the
evaluations. (B-47)

In September 2012, the Parents referred the Student to Cornell-Scott H111 Health Center
(CENTER) for emotional issues. It was noted that the Student had difﬁculties with social
skills and attention seeking behaviors. The CENTER requested the Student’s school
record and information. The Board was provided with information that the Student was
receiving counseling services. (B-104 and 3-62, Testimony of Social Worker)

The Student’s mental health counselor at the CENTER formulated a treatment plan based
on a diagnosis of disruptive behavior, psychotic behavior, ADHD and autism. (Testimony
of Mental Health Counselor)

At an evaluation performed at the CENTER, the evaluating psychiatrist ruled out
psychotic disorder and ADHD, The Student presented as a student on the Autism
Spectrum. (Testimony of Psychiatrist)

In further sessions it was noted that the Student still had issues with imaginaly friends
and aliens. The doctor prescribed a small dosage of Risperdal and shortly after the
psychosis stopped and the medication did not have to be increased. (Testimony of
Psychiatrist)

The last Visit to the psychiatrist’s ofﬁce occurred on March 2, 2014. The Student did not
demonstrate any psychosis. The psychiatrist would support an outside evaluation but did
know if a diagnostic placement was best. The doctor was made aware of the threat to the
principal by the Student two days after it occurred. The psychiatrist was not consulted by
anyone in regards to the Student’s threat. (Testimony of Psychiatrist)

On January 13, 2012, the Student was suspended for one day for gesturing with a plastic
toy knife at another Student. This incident occurred in the aﬁernoon on the school bus.
The school requested evaluations but the Parents refused to consent. (Testimony of Social
Worker, 3-53)

The ﬁrst grade teacher was not concerned with the Student’s behavior in her class. The
student had two incidents where he touched another Student and the incident was taken
care of in the class setting. When corrected he would stop. Most incidents involving the
Student’s behavior occurred in the cafeteria or on the bus. The Student was selected as

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

Student of the month. He did well in class and behaved. The teacher did not feel the
Student was a danger in the class. (Testimony of First Grade Teacher)

13. The second grade teacher testiﬁed that the Student complied with instructions in the
classroom. He was rewarded by being placed on the “bucket list” for acts of kindness.
There was one incident in the classroom where the Student was in disagreement where a
bin should be placed. The Student became upset and the teacher called the ofﬁce. This
behavior was out of the ordinary. There were two incidents in the classroom but there
was no fear of danger. (Testimony of Second Grade Teacher)

14. The school social worker was not aware the student was in treatment or taking any
medications. Clifford Beers Clinic made a request for Student’s information but was not
aware if services had been obtained from the clinic. A report had been generated by the
clinic but not shared with the school. (Testimony of Social Worker, B—54)

15. In the third grade classroom, the Student was well behaved. The student was placed on
the “bucket list” for acts of kindness. The Student was yelling in the classroom; the
teacher took him to the hallway and asked him to calm down. The Student listened to the
teacher and controlled himself. (Testimony of Third Grade Teacher, Parent’s Exhibit3

No. 4, 13—5)

16. In the third grade, the Student was suspended for one day. He pushed a staff member
because he was not allowed to buy snacks. Snacks can only be purchased after the
students have eaten their lunch. The Student had thrown away his lunch. The Parents
requested a PPT meeting. They did not believe that the incident happened as stated.
(Testimony of Social Worker)

17. In a group session, the school psychologist explains bus rules to the Student. The Student
would state that he did not understand. The psychologist stated that the Student does not
have cognitive issue and understanding rules is not an issue. The Student struggles with
relationships with people that discipline him. The Student does not understand the
meaning of swearing. (Testimony of School Psychologist)

18. On May 13, 2013, at the request of the parents, the CENTER sent a letter to the Board
advising them that the Student’s primary diagnosis is Asperger’s Disorder. This change
was based on previous treatment information received, information collected from the
Parents and observations of Student’s behaviors within therapy. It was noted in the letter
that if the Board had any questions they could contact the treating psychiatrist. The
Board was not provided with the evaluation process. (B-67, Testimony of Social Worker)

19. On October 30, 2013 the Student was suspended for one day for inappropriate language
and behavior. (B-74)

20. The Student questions the rules and their consequences. He questioned his understanding
of the rules and his ability to defend himself. The Student had difﬁculty keeping hands

3 Hereafter Parents Exhibits will be noted as “Pq.” followed by the number of the exhibit.

4

May 12,2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

and feet to himself. In the second grade, the Student responded appropriately to
counseling sewices and during that year he did not receive any out of school suspensions.
He only had one episode in the classroom where he was yelling at one of his peers. He
had difﬁculty calming down but when called came willingly. (Testimony of Social
Worker)

The Student’s third grade progress report for the ﬁrst marking period stated that he was
adjusting well to the third grade and that occasionally he gets a little excited and calls out.
He appears happy in school and is comfortable asking for help when he needs it. His
second semester progress report stated that the Student is learning when he makes a
mistake or does something wrong to accept the correction, apologize and move on. He is
handling problems in a calmer manner. (B-76 and B-83)

The Student continued in a counseling group in the third grade and the social worker
continued to work on anger management and peer skills. (Testimony of Social Worker)

On September 20, 2013, the Student was written up for swearing on the bus. On March
3, 2014, he was suspended from bus service for one day. On March 4, 5 and 7, 2014, the
Student had incidents on the school bus. The Student’s school transportation was
changed to a small bus and no ﬁnther bus behavior incidents were reported. Until the
Student threatened the principal the social worker did not feel the Student was a threat.
The Student does not like to go to the principal’s ofﬁce. (B-86 to B~90, Testimony of
Social Worker)

On March 19, 2014, the Parent reponed to the Mental Health Counselor at CENTER that
the Student Wanted to bring a bat to school to harm his principal. The Parent discussed it
with the Student and the Parent checked his backpack to see if there was a hat. The
Counselor discussed other alternative ways that the Student can express his feelings. On
March 20, 2014, the Counselor sent an email to the school reporting the discussion with
the Parent; she repomed it to the school because it was a safety issue, The Counselor did
not recall if the Parent found a bat in the backpack. The Student did not seem to be
um'aveled and the Parent had a safety protocol. The Student seems to understand school
rules; the issue is not the rule but the setting. If the setting is not structured he has a
difﬁcult time. (Testimony of Mental Health Counselor, B-l 00 and B-107)

The Student has not been in for treatment since the March 19, 2014 incident. Counselor
was not aware if the Student is being treated elsewhere. Counselor agreed that a
psychiatric evaluation was proper but did not know if a therapeutic placement was
appropriate. (Testimony of Mental Health Counselor)

On March 21, 2014 notice was sent to the Parents informing them that the Student was
being suspended for 10 days, commencing on March 24, 2014 and ending April 4, 2014,
for threatening the principal. A manifestation determination was scheduled for March 31,
2014 and a PPT was also scheduled for that date. (B-92, B-93 and B-94)

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

27. A 504 meeting was held on March 31, 2014 for the manifestation determination. The

28

29.

30.

31.

Parents had an advocate from the Ofﬁce of Protection and Advocacy. The team reviewed
the Student’s history of prior incidents and diagnoses. Team members articulated the
Student’s lack of appropriate coping skills. The Student’s teacher cemented that she
does not see these issues in her classroom. A11 team members agreed that the behavior
was a manifestation of the Student’s disabilities. The team agreed that the school did not
fail to implement his 504 plan. The team questioned whether maintaining the current
placement is substantially likely to result in injury to self or others. An alternative
placement at an alternative district school was offered during the suspension. The
Parents refused the alternative placement. (Testimony of Assistant Director of Pupil
Sewices, B-99)

The Student’s conduct was a manifestation of his disability (autism) and disruptive
behavior. There is no issue of concern of the Student going after the principal; the
concern is on the school bus. The school psychologist stated that, “the mother had found
a bat in the backpack.” A diagnostic placement would be appropriate in order to gather
more information. A behavior plan was not presented because the psychologist did not
know if a behavior plan would be useful and would have helped Student to understand
the rules. (Testimony of School Psychologist)

After the manifestation determination meeting, the Board conducted a PPT. The team
addressed the Student’s eligibility under IDEA. The team recommended psychiatric and
neuropsychological evaluations. The Parent agreed to the evaluations. The team would
provide the Parent with names of evaluators for their consideration, but it is not a
“mutually agreed upon” evaluator. If Parents are not in agreement with the evaluator
they could request an independent educational evaluation after the Board’s evaluations
are completed. The team discussed a diagnostic placement for the Student. The Parent
objected to a diagnostic placement. The team decided to allow the Student to remain in
the alternative placement that had been provided to the Student during his suspension. (B-
95, B—98 and Testimony from Testimony of Assistant Director of Pupil Sewices)

Alternative measures were presented: an alternative placement, cab to and from school
and searching the Student’s backpack. These would lessen risks but not ensure
something would not happen. (Testimony of Social Worker)

The Student has not been in school since March 19, 2014. The board has offered
transportation to an alternative placement but the Student has not attended school. The
Board considered other measures before an outside placement. Other programs at the
current alternative placement would not interfere with the Student’s program. The
assistant director of pupil services opined that a therapeutic day placement would be
appropriate. The Board would provide transpmtation. The March 31, 2014 agreed upon
psychiatric and neuropsychological evaluations have not been done because the Board
has not been able to ﬁnd available evaluators. (Testimony of Assistant Director of Pupil

Services)

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

ARGUMENT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

1.

The Student has not been found eligible for special education and related services as set
fonh in IDEA, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1401, et seq., and is scheduled to undergo evaluations to
determine his eligibility under iDEA. (Findings of Fact No. 29)

The IDEA provides that prior to the change of placement of a child with a disability due
to violation of school rules, a manifestation determination must be completed. This
provision provides that:
within 10 school days of any decision to change the placement of a child with a
disability because of a Violation of a code of student conduct, the local educational
agency, the parent, and relevant members of the IEP Team (as determined by the parent
and the local educational agency) shall review all relevant information in the student‘s
ﬁle, including the child's IEP, any teacher observations, and any relevant information
provided by the parents to determine --
(I) if the conduct in question was caused by, or had a direct and substantiai
relationship to, the child's disability; or
(11) if the conduct in question was the direct result of the local educational agency's
failure to implement the IEP." 20 U.S.C. § 1415(k)(1)
If the LEA, the parents and the other members of the IEP team determine that either
sub-clause is applicable for the child, the conduct is determined to be a manifestation of
the student's disability. Id.

Although the term "manifestation determination" (MD) does not appear in the regulatoty
language of Section 504, OCR interprets Section 504 as requiring an MD review in
connection with disciplinary actions that constitute a signiﬁcant change in placement
under 34 CFR 104.35. See Dunkin (M0) R-VSch. Dis!., 52 IDELR 138 (OCR 2009)
(OCR interprets the Section 504 regulation at 34 CFR 104.35 to require a manifestation
determination prior to a suspension of more than 10 days). Because an expulsion (along
with a long-tei‘m suspension) is considered a "signiﬁcant change in placement" under the
Section 504 regulations at 34 CFR 104.35, a district may not expel a student with a 504
plan without ﬁrst conducting a manifestation determination and ﬁnding that the
misconduct was not related to the student's disability. If the MD review team determines
that the behavior is a manifestation of the student's disability, then it may not expel the
student or take other disciplinary action that constitutes a change in placement. S—I v.
Turlington, 5521DELR 267 (5th Cir. 1981).

As a rule suspension and expulsion of students with disabilities have been treated the
same way under both the IDEA and Section 504. OCR has stated that the same
protections available to students classiﬁed as disabled under the IDEA are available to
students classiﬁed as disabled under Section 504, with the exception of students who are
disabled solely by Viltue of alcoholism or drug addiction.

Students with identified disabilities cannot be expelled or suspended from school for
more than 10 school days for misconduct that was a manifestation of the student's
disability. Honig v. Doe, supra. OSEP Memorandum 95-16, 22 IDELR 531 (OSEP 1995).

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

In addition, the FAPE requirement of Section 504 (34 CFR 104.33) includes appropriate
procedures for discipline, designed to meet individual educational needs of students with
disabilities as adequately as the needs of nondisabled students are met. S-I v. Turlington,
552 IDELR 267 (5th Cir. 1981).

6. The hearing ofﬁcer's statutory authority pursuant to 20 U.S.C. § 1415(K)(3)(1)(B)(ii)(1)
is ﬁn’ther clariﬁed at 34 C.F.R. § 300.532(b)(2)(i) in which the hearing ofﬁcer may return
a child to a placement if the hearing ofﬁcer ﬁnds that the removal was a violation of 34
CPR. § 300.530 01‘ that the child’s behavior was a manifestation of the child’s disability;
or (ii) Order a change in placement of a child with a disability to an appropriate interim
alternative educational setting for not more than 45 days if the hearing ofﬁcer determines
that maintaining the current placement of the child is substantially likely to result in
injuiy to the child or to others.

7. In this case, the 504 team found that the disciplinary behavior that has resulted in the
disciplinaly action was caused by and had a direct and substantial relationship to the
Student’s disability. The 504 team determined that the disciplinary behavior
demonstrated by the Student was a manifestation of his disability and the disruptive
behavior was characteristic of the Student’s disability and requested evaluations.

8. The Board is requesting a 45 day IAES at a diagnostic placement for the Student. The
Board contends that the Student’s current placement is substantially likely to result in
injury to the child 01' others. I disagree.

34 C.F.R.300.532 (a) requires that the current placement is “substantially likely to result
in injury.” "Substantial evidence is more than a mere scintilla. It means such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to suppmt a conclusion."
Consolidated Edison Co. v, NLRB, 305 U.S. 197, 229, 59 S.Ct. 206, 83 L.Ed. 126 (1938);
see Shipley v. Arkansas Blue Cross and Blue Shield, 333 F.3d 898, 901 (8th Cir.2003).
Substantial evidence, however, does not mean a preponderance of the evidence. Leonard
v. Southwestern Bell Corp. Disability Income Plan, 341 F.3d 696, 701 (8th Cir. 2003).

The factual ﬁndings must be supported by some substantial level of evidence, which need
not rise to the level of preponderance. The evidence must be substantial when the entire
record is examined: contrary evidence may not simply be ignored on review and the
evidence must be such that it would be possible for a reasonable fact-ﬂnder to reach the
same conclusions that the administrative fact—ﬂnder did. If any of these conditions is not
met, the administrative decision must be reversed. Menendez-Donis v. Ashcroft, 360 F.
3d 915 (8th Circuit 2004).

The Student does have behavioral episodes but they are mainly in the cafeteria and on the
school bus. They do not rise to the level requiring an IAES. These behavioral episodes
occur in settings that are not stwctured. The Student needs structured settings (Finding
of Fact No. 25). His behavior in the classroom is not problematic because the setting is
structured and the teachers are able to control the environment. (Findings of Fact Nos. 12,

13,15, 21 and 28)

May 12, 2014 Final Decision and Order Case No. 14-0464

9.

10.

11.

The Student’s teachers all testiﬁed that in the classroom the Student was well behaved
and when he misbehaved, he accepted the correction and listened to the teacher. F indings
of FactNos. 12, 13 and 16) The school psychologist testiﬁed that her concern with the
Student was on the school bus. (Finding of Fact No. 28). The psychiatrist and the
Counselor from the Center, who have been treating the Student for more than a year, do
not feel that a diagnostic placement would be best for the Student. (Findings of Fact Nos.
10 and 25) For these reasons and all the evidence presented, the Student shall be returned
to his placement and not to an IAES.

I disagree with the school psychologist and am ordering a functional behavioral
assessment (FBA). The Student, since kindergaiten, has misbehaved on the school bus
and cafeteria. After the issue with the toy knife an FBA should have been requested.
Section 504 requires a district to accommodate the behavioral difﬁculties of a student
with a disability by developing a BIP. Morgan v. Chris L., 25 IDBLR 227 (6th Cir. 1997)
On September 20, 2013, the Student was written up for swearing on the bus. On March
3, 2014, he was suspended from bus service for one day. On March 4, 5 and 7, 2014, the
Student had incidents on the school bus and no behavioral assessment was requested.

The solution was changing the mode of transpottation. (Finding of Fact No. 23) This is a
band aid solution that does not resolve the problem.

To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed herein,
the Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

2.

3.

Maintenance of the Student’s current placement is not substantially likely to result in
injury to the child or to others.

The Student shall not be placed in an IAES as requested by the Board but the Student
shall be returned to his March 19, 2014 placement.

Within ten school days of the publishing of this decision, the Board shall perform a
behavioral assessment of the Student and create a behavioral intervention plan.

If within 5 school days of the publishing of this decision, the Board still does not have
evaluators to perform the psychiatric and neuropsychological evaluations agreed to at the
PPT, the Board shall consult with the psychiatrist who treated the Student at the
CENTER and request the names of two psychiatrists and two psychologists who can
perform the evaluations. The Board shall choose the evaluators from those referred and
expedite the evaluations. ‘

I f the local or regional board of‘education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
00qu by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-] 83, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

«'7 ,- /'

( Hearing Off‘i’ﬁSignature

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

