January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Danbury Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Gerry McMahon
The Law Ofﬁces of Gerry McMahon, LLC

98 Mill Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT 06811

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecca Rudnick Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board denied the Student a free appropriate public education [“FAPE”] for
the 2011—12 and 2012—13 school years;

2. Whether the Board failed to offer the Student FAPE for the 2013—14 school year;

Whether the Student shall be placed in a therapeutic residential placement for the 2013~

14 school year as requested by the Parents;

4. Whether the Student is entitled to compensatory education;

5. Whether the Student has been subjected to discrimination in violation of Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.

W

A motion to dismiss was ﬁled and the parties came to an agreement regarding the Motion to
Dismiss with clariﬁcations and changes to Issue No. 1 and Issue No. 5‘ Issue No, 5 was
withdrawn by the Parents, Any claims made relate to July 24, 201] and thereafter, according to
the parties ’ agreement.

The remedy that is setforth as Issue No. 3 was revised on the record to state as follows:
"Whether the Student shall be placed in a therapeutic placement for the 2013—14 school year as
requested by the Parents. ”

SUMMARY:

The 15 year old Student has been identiﬁed as eligible for special education under the
category of Other Health Impaired. The Student has been placed at the Board middle school
during the 2011~12 school year and the Board high school for the 2012—13 and 2013~14 school
years. During the 2012—13 school year, the Student had many disciplinary referrals including 12
days of out of school suspension in spring 2013 for violation of personal boundaries. The social

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14-0069

worker failed to provide more than half of the services set forth in the IEP during the 2012—13
school year. The Student failed many of his classes at the conclusion of the 2012—13 school year.
In May 2013, the PPT placed the Student in a program at the high school for the 2013-14 school
year. The Parent brought this request for hearing to challenge this placement, seeking a private
therapeutic placement.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board received this request for hearing on July 25, 2013 [Exhibit H.O.—1] and a preheating
conference convened on July 30, 2013. At the prehearing conference, the parties reported that
they agreed to mediate this matter, and the ﬁrst hearing date was scheduled for September 20,
2013‘ Subsequently, the Parents’ attorney submitted a request to postpone the September 20,
2013 hearing date and extend the mailing date of the decision so that the parties had additional
time to attempt to settle the case after review of a recently completed evaluation, which was

granted,

The hearing convened 0n 1 1 hearing dates in October, November and December 2013. Requests
for extensions of the mailing date of the decision were granted to allow the parties to schedule
additional hearing dates and submit closing arguments. Written closing arguments were
submitted on December 27, 2013. Reply briefs were submitted on December 31, 2013.

The Parents’ witnesses were the Mother; Lisa Carriero, Board special education teacher and the
Student’s case manager [“Special Education Teacher”]; Carol Glintenkamp, the Board high
school social worker [“Social W0rker”]; Mary Best, neuropsychologist [“Dr. Best”]; Linda
Katherine Valiante, Board special education autism consultant [“Autism Consultant”]; the
Student and David Dunieavy, Admissions Director of The Devereux Glenhohne School
[“Admissions Director,” “Glenholme”]. In addition to the Board’s cross examination, the
Board’s attorney presented their direct examination of these witnesses during the presentation of
the Parents’ case.

The Board’s witnesses were Christine Holmes, Board special education facilitator [“Facilitator”];
Kelly Truchsess, Board secondary supervisor of special education [“Secondary Supervisor”] and
Deborah Maillouvaetersen, Board Director of Special Services [“Director”].

The Parents submitted exhibits P-l through P-74. The Board submitted exhibits B-l through B—
38. A1] exhibits were entered as full exhibits.

A11 exhibits and the testimony of the witnesses were thoroughly reviewed and given their due
consideration in this decision.

To the extent that the procedural history, summary and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and Vice versa. Bonnie Ann F . v. Caliallen

Indegendent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD, Tex, 1993)

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

STATEMENT OF JURIDISCTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statmes
(“CGS”) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedures Act (“UAPA”), CGS
§§ 4—176e to 4-178, inclusive, §§4—181a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACTS:

l. The Student is 15 years old and is currently attending the Board high school. It is
undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services under the

category of other health impaired.

2. The Student has had behavioral problems which relate back to kindergarten. [Testimony
Mother] In 2008, Diana Martinez, Ph.D., a neuropsychologist, diagnosed the Student
with a Cognitive Disorder NOS; Attention Deﬁcit Disorder, predominately Hyperactive
Impulsive type and Generalized Anxiety Disorder which was set forth in a repoﬁ shared
with the Board school staff. [Testimony Mother, Exhibit P—10]

3. In May 2011, the Flaming and Placement Team [PPT] convened to plan for the Student’s
8'h grade year. The team agreed that the Student was to be in co—taught classes 11.25 hours
per week, study skills for 1.5 hours per week, social skills for .5 hours per week and .5 hours
per week of counseling. At this time, it was reported that the Student had good grades in all
subjects except for physical education [“PE”], and that while there was a plan for the
Student to change for PE in the nurse’s ofﬁce, he was not taking advantage of this plan. It
was also noted that the Student had to be “chased down” to hand in his written work. He
was found to be more agitated and having difficulty in the aﬁemoon. The school
psychologist reported that when the Student makes a mistake he does not recognize his pan
in the problem and in maintaining appropriate personal space. At that time, the team
reviewed and modiﬁed the Student’s current behavior plan. [Exhibit B—1]

4. In October 2011, a case conference was convened with the Parent at the Board middle
school. At this time, it was noted that the Student was missing homework in math, had
difﬁculty settling down alter lunch, continues to snuggle with organization, “shines” in class
paiticipation but did not always change for PB. The Parent was concerned about PE and
homework. The action plan formulated at the case conference was to continue the behavior
chal’ts, change counseling to small group, have the student wear gym clothes to school to
avoid the changing problem, and have the Mother work with the Student to help him write
more neatly in his planner, bring his completed homework home to check and continue to
check his backpack. [Testimony Facilitator, Exhibit B-2]

5. During the 2011—12 school year, the Student had some disciplinaly referrals, including
suspensions for stealing, theft [Stet] and bringing an inappropriate item to school.
[Testimony Mother, Exhibits P—18, P-20, B—3]

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

6.

10.

11.

In January 2012, the Student’s individualized education program [“IEP"] was amended to
provide for minibus transportation at the request of the Mother. The Mother was concerned
about the Student’s safety and that he would come home agitated aﬁer the bus ride, so his
transportation was changed to the minibus. [Testimony Mother, Exhibit B-4]

The PPT convened again on January 31, 2012 to plan for the Student’s 9"1 grade program at
the high school. At that time, it was reported that the Student continued to not complete his
homework, and that organization and responsibility were lacking. It was noted that the
Student is sometimes impulsive, seeks attention and displays immaturity, and that classwork
is “greatly modiﬁed.” [Exhibit B-6]

In September 2012, at the beginning of the Student’s 9‘11 grade year, the Mother asked that
the Student be placed in a social skills group at the School, but the Social Worker told her
that it was difﬁcult to have a social skills group due to scheduling problems. [Testimony
Mother]

As all freshmen at the Board high school, the Student was in the Freshmen Academy, which
is a model similar to the middle school with a team of four academic teachers, and
sometimes includes a special education teacher. The team is supposed to work
collaboratively with same group of students. The teachers meet in the mornings to discuss
students and their progress and to convene parent meetings. [Testimony Special Education
Teacher]

At the beginning of the 2012—13 school year, the Parent came into the School for a
Freshmen Academy Team Meeting. The team discussed how the Student was doing in
classes and his problems with homework. Although the Student’s lEP for this school year
required that the Student be placed in co—taught classes for his academic classes, he was not
in the co—taught classes for all of his academic classes at the beginning of the school year.
He had also been placed in Algebra I, rather than Pre-algebra, which was not successful. He
was not placed in co-taught algebra because there wasn’t a co—taught algebra course on the
team the Student was placed on, according to the Special Education Teacher. After this
meeting, the Student was moved back into co—taught social studies and math beginning on
October 1. When that change was made, he was also placed into a pre-algebra course as he
had a lot of gaps and needed additional math support. [T estimony Special Education
Teacher, Exhibit P-3 8]

The PPT convened on October 19, 2012. At that time, the team discussed the re—evaluation
and the current status of the Student’s program. [Exhibits P—41, B-7] The Board members
of the PPT did not discuss any behavioral interventions at this PPT. [Testimony Mother;
Exhibits P-41, B-7] As of the date of meeting, the Student was having difﬁculty getting
from the school nurse to his next S‘h period class. His trips to the nurse’s office were
scheduled during his resource class in 4lh period. His resource class was held from 10 to
10:40 a.m., and it was adjusted so that he leﬁ about halfway through the resource room class
to go to the nurse for his medication and not be late for 5‘“ period. [Testimony Special
Education Teacher; Exhibits P—41 , B-7] With this plan, however, he would miss a
substantial amount of time from his resource class. The Student used the time in resource

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

12.

13‘

14.

15‘

to organize work, and begin 01' complete classroom assignments or homework assignments.
[Testimony Special Education Teacher] Despite the time provided in resource, and with the
time lost for medication Visits, the Student’s homework completion problems continued
throughout his 90' grade school year.

During the 9‘h grade school year the Student stalted with a typical school planner used by all
students at the Board high school. That was not successful for the Student. The school staff
did not provide another tool for the Student to use to achieve his lEP goal for use of his
planner to improve in his organization and study skills. Instead the Special Education
Teacher asked the Mother to provide a bigger planner with more room for writing, which
the Mother did. [Testimony Special Education Teacher]

The Special Education Teacher was responsible for implementing many of the Student’s
goals during the 2012-13 school year. The goals set forth in the IEP of October 19, 2012,
included goal one: Demonstrate an improvement in organization, study skills and learning
strategies necessary to progress toward achieving the learning standards by achieving 3 out
of 3 objectives. According to the Special Education Teacher, the goal would be met if the
Student received a passing grade of 65, the lowest grade for a D, in his courses. So, if he
didn’t fail his courses, he would have been found to meet this goal. Objective one, which
refers to coming to class prepared and with his materials, would be measured by achieving
passing grades and coming to class with his binder. Objective two, demonstrating the ability
to organize classroom materials, was not veiy successful. The Student was unable to do that
very well, so according to the Special Education Teacher, they kept revisiting this area of
concem. Progress was checked by the Special Education Teacher’s observation, but she
didn’t keep any records of that. For objective three, to organize and record all assignments,
the Special Education Teacher didn’t document his progress on this, testifying that the
documentation would be his grades in his classes. [Testimony Special Education Teacher,
Exhibit P-41] The Student was unsuccessful at this goal because he continued to have
issues with his homework assigmnents throughout his 9‘“ grade year and he failed many of
his classes.

Goal two in the Student’s iEP for the 2012—13 school year was to demonstrate an
improvement in attending skills necessary to learn effectively in the school environment and
progress toward achieving learning standards. The evaluation procedure for goal two was
achievement of objectives, with the perfonnance criteria successful completion, mastering
objectives 3 of 3 times. The objectives reference a goal of maintaining his attention 65
percent of the class time. No data was collected during the school year to determine
whether the Student achieved this goal. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit F—
41] Attending to class 65 percent of the time was not an appropriate level for mastery of
this goal and without any data taken before, during and at the conclusion of the school year
it is merely a guess as to whether the Student achieved this goal, which was set at a
insufﬁcient level ofperfonnance of 65 percent of the time.

Goal three of the Student’s IEP was to demonstrate organization and study skills in order to
participate successfully in academic classes. [Exhibit P—41] The goal was for the Student to
achieve a 65 percent in his grades, passing with a D 01‘ betteit No data was collected for any

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

0f the objectives in goal three. In objective one, which was to keep class work and
notebooks orderly, the Special Education Teacher conducted a weekly check on the
materials. The self—advoeacy objective two was to request extra help, although no data was
kept on whether the Student was doing so. Objective three references using resource
periods effectively. Again, no data was collected to determine if the student was achieving
this goal, although the perfomiance criterion was frequency/trials. [Testimony Special
Education Teacher, Exhibit P-41

Goals four and ﬁve were drafted and implemented by the Social Worker. The Social
Worker kept no records in her logs as to the topic of her support or the counseling that
was being addressed in her sessions with the Student. Goal four was that the Student will
use social work supports routinely and appropriately. Goal ﬁve was that the Student
would identify and build on areas of personal strength. According to the Social Worker,
the Student made only limited progress on these goals during the 2012—13 school year.
[Testimony Social Worker; Exhibits P—30a, P—41, P-58]

Goal six was drafted and implemented by the Special Education Teacher. The post—
secondary education training goal was not specially designed for the Student. Rather,
completion of the goal was to participate in the student self-assessment which every 9'h
grade student at the school completes on the computer to understand their strengths and
weaknesses and their career interests. The Special Education Teacher was present during
the time a class of 27 to 30 students participated in the guidance counselor-led program
on the computer. The Special Education helped the Student “a little bit” during this
process. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit P—4l] This was not a goal aimed
at the unique needs of the Student, but was a guidance program for all students.

During the 2012-13 school year, the Special Education Teacher would consult with the
Student’s teachers. When a qualter was concluding, they would discuss the Student’s
grades. If the grade came out to be 64 for the Student, they would give him a 65 after
some discussion to allow for a passing grade. [Testimony Special Education Teacher]
Therefore, even though 65 as a grade was a criteria for achieving some of the Student’s
goals, the 65 in some cases was not actually a 65.

During the 2012—13 school year, the Student went to the nurse’s ofﬁce every day for
medication. The nurse’s ofﬁce was also used as the Student’s safe place if he became
agitated or upset. [Testimony Mother]

The Student did not have a successful time with other students at the Board school. On one
occasion, two boys approached him in a threatening manner and took the Student’s snacks
away from him after he had just purchased them at the school store. The Special Education
Teacher also reported to the Social Worker that the Student was experiencing a little bit of‘
harassment by another student in resource room. While in testimony the Special Education
Teacher attempted to minimize this harassment, it is found that the Student was treated
poorly by the other student in resource room and the Special Education Teacher did not take
appropriate steps to resolve the interpersonal difficulties in resource room. [Testimony
Special Education Teacher, Exhibit P—68] The Social Worker told the Student he should

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

21.

22.

vary his route to avoid seeing the students who snatched his snacks, rather than addressing
this incident in a more appropriate mamier. [Testimony Social Worker]

The Special Education Teacher conducted an educational assessment of the Student in
March and April 2013. His scores in the testing were:

Reading Standard Score Percentile WJ—III Classiﬁcation
Letter—Word Ident. 99 47 Average
Passage Comprehen. 102 55 Average
Reading Fluency 89 24 Low Average
Broad Reading 94 34 Average
Oral Language Standard Score Percentile WJ-III Classiﬁcation
Understanding

Directions 79 1 1 Low
Story Recall 87 19 Average
Oral Language 78 7 Low
Written Language Standard Score Percentile WJ-III Classiﬁcation
Spelling 107 68 Average
Written Expression 83 12 Low Average
Written Fluency 82 12 Low Average
Writing Samples 84 14 Low Average
Broad Written Language 93 31 Average
Mathematics Standard Score Percentile WJ-III Classiﬁcation
Calculations 88 21 Low Average
Math Fluency 81 1 1 Low Average
Applied Problems 82 1 1 Low Average
Broad Math 82 1 1 Low Average

While the Special Education Teacher concluded that the Student was able to conaprehend
grade level materials, he was failing or nearly ~failing all of his classes in 9I grade.
[Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit B-S]

The Board school psychologist conducted a psycho-educational evaluation in May 2013. In
the evaluation the school psychologist noted that as the Student walked down the hall, he
gave a friendly hello to almost every student who passed by, most by name. it was noted
that several of the students “reacted by making faces at [the Student] behind his back. Other
students completely ignored him and some said hello back. [The Student] was completely
unaware of how other students were reacting to him." The Student’s results on the
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence — second edition, included a verbal
comprehension index of 100, a perceptual reasoning index of 90 and a full scale IQ of 94.
The teacher’s scores on the Behavior Assessment for Chiidren , 2 (BASC—Z) found the

Student to have clinically signiﬁcant scores 1n hyperactivity, aggressmn, conduct problems,

7

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

23.

24.

25.

26‘

externalization problems, atypically, withdrawal and attention problems. The teacher’s
scores also noted that the Student was at risk in the areas of learning problems, school
problems, leadership, functional communication, study skills and adaptive skills. [Exhibits
B—9, P—49] The Special Education Teacher testiﬁed that the repmt is inaccurate in its
comment that she reported that the Student oﬁen threatens to hurt others. The Student
wasn’t threatening to hult others in his freshmen year. [Testimony Special Education
Teacher; Exhibits B-9, P-49]

At the end of April and the beginning of May, the Autism Consultant obsewed the Student
on two occasions in a couple of classes. The Autism Consultant was asked to conduct an
observation of the Student to see if there were any strategies and recommendations about the
concems of difﬁculty attending and completing tasks, rather than a comprehensive
observation of the Student’s behavior. [Testimony Autism Consultant] The Autism
Consultant is seeking celtiﬁcation as a board certiﬁed behavioral analyst [BCBA], but has
not yet been ceitiﬁed. [Testimony Autism Consultant, Exhibit B—34] While the Autism
Consultant noted that the Student had consistent focus on the instruction in one of the
classes, he left the classroom twice and had to be retrieved by staff the second time he left
the classroom. The Autism Consultant never conﬁnned with the staff in the classroom as to
whether it was appropriate for the Student to leave the classroom twice during instruction.
The Mother was not provided a copy of the observation repott prior to the May PPT
meeting. [Testimony Mother, Exhibit P—SO] The Autism Consultant noticed that the tutor
seemed to be distracting the Student while he was trying to complete an assignment. The
additional concerns of personal boundaty violations and other serious behavioral concems
were not a palt of this limited obsewation. [Testimony Autism Consultant]

During the 2012-13 school year, no staff conducted a functional behavioral assessment of
the Student, and never contacted the Parent to tly to determine triggers to his behavior
issues, despite the Student’s frequent behavioral problems. [Testimony Mother]

During the Student’s 9|h grade year, his homework issues were persistent. He wouldn’t
complete homework, failed to hand it in, lost it and couldn’t t'md it. The Parent would get
phone calls and emails on an almost daily basis from the Special Education Teacher about
homework problems throughout 9'h grade. Although the Mother was questioned throughout
the school year by School staff as to how to resolve the ongoing homework issues, the
Mother simply didn’t know how to ﬁx the problem. [Testimony Mother]

During the Student’s 9th grade year, the Special Education Teacher was aware that the
Student wasn’t comfortable changing in the locker room for PE, so they offered the Social
Worker’s restroom as a place where he could change. The Special Education Teacher never
discussed why the Student was uncomfonable changing in the locker room and the Student
did not explain why he was not comfottable changing in the locker room. [Testimony
Special Education Teacher] The Student continued to have disciplinaly problems
throughout the 9lh grade school year relating to skipping his PE class. [Testimony Special
Education Teacher, Exhibit P—25] The Student failed to patticipate in PE class so frequently
that it lowered his PE grade to a failing grade. [Testimony Special Education Teacher]
Although the Student’s avoidance of changing in the locker room related back to his middle

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

27.

28.

29.

30.

school years and impacted his ability to eam credits in high school, no Board staff ever took
any funher steps to assess the Student’s PE and locker room avoidance.

The Student exhibited immature behavior during the 9‘h grade school year. He would bring
toys to school at times. He also came to school one day with a container of ice cream in his
backpack which he wanted to eat during the day. That container melted all over the place,
according to the Special Education Teacher. [Testimony Special Education Teacher]

During the 2012-13 school year, the Student was unable to consistently do homework,
prepare for exams or keep school materials organized. He wasn’t consistently studying for
quizzes or exams. The Special Education Teacher attempted to use strategies to assist the
Student, but even at the end of the school year the Student was not performing consistently
in the resource classroom. Prompting was not working as an effective method for
addressing the Student’s issues in the resource class. The Special Education Teacher would
routinely contact the Mother to repott things such as that the Student was getting nothing
accomplished in the resource room. The Special Education Teacher tried strategies which
included talking to the Student to get him to take out the work he was supposed to do and
suggesting that perhaps he could work for 20 minutes and then have time for computer or to
get a snack during the resource class. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit B-18]

The Mother was not aware that the Student had ongoing behavioral issues in aerospace
class/ROTC, until the instmctor contacted the Social Worker in March 2013 about ongoing
problems that the Student had with inappropriate touching of males and females in his class.
Neither the Social Worker nor any other School staff member provided the Mother and the
Student with any suggestions on how to address this ongoing problem that the Student was
experiencing in respecting personal boundaries and they did not suggest any additional
services to address this ongoing issue. [Testimony Mother, Exhibit P-69]

The PPT convened on May 20, 2013 to conduct an almual review, review the evaluations
and develop an IEP for the Student. The Facilitator; the Special Education Teacher; Carol
Nielsen, school psychologist; the Social Worker; Jackie Rodriguez, school guidance
counselor; the Autism Consultant; Donald Tonic, Board self—contained program special
education teacher; Heather Salamone, a regular education teacher and the Mother were
present at the meeting. While the Board members of the PPT discussed the self-contained
program at the Board high school, the Mother did not want to pursue that program and the
program was not recommended at this PPT meeting. The PPT agreed that the Student
continues to qualify for special education under 0H1. The PPT approved a program for the
Student which consisted of 15 hours per week of co-taught classes, 3.75 hours per week of
study skills, .5 hours per week of social work sewices, a 3:1 tutor suppott for academic
classes only and access to an Alpha Smart. The Parent requested that additional testing be
completed. The School agreed to conduct some of the requested testing, but indicated that
they would be completed by October 31, 2013. [Exhibit B—lO] When the Parent had
requested the neuropsychological testing, the Board members of the PPT informed her at the
meeting that they would look into it and get back to her, but that the team agreed to conduct
additional evaluations on written language, auditory processing, pragmatic language and
visual motor processing. The Board members of the PPT did not provide any explanation as

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No 14—0069

31.

32.

33.

34.

to why there was such a long delay between the request for evaluations and the completion
of them. [Testimony Mother]

At the PPT meeting, the Board members of the PPT discussed adding a tutor to take the
place of the role the Special Education Teacher had for the Student during the 9m grade year.
The tutor would be available to cue expected behavior in class, suppoﬂ the Student in
organization, continue to ensure that homework was written down, and ensure that the
teachers were aware that the Student was a special education student, which the Special
Education Teacher testiﬁed were things she did as the Student’s case manager in 9m grade.
The team also discussed the self—contained program at the high school, where there is a
smaller group of students and three teachers who work intensively with the students. In that
program there is a behavior intervention piece and the classrooms are close together,
according to the Special Education Teacher. A teacher from the self—contained program
discussed the program at the PPT meeting. The Mother was not interested in the program at
the time, and the Board did not offer this program in an IEP for the Student’s 10"1 grade year
at this PPT meeting. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Mother; Exhibit B-10]

At the time of the PPT meeting, the teachers were repoﬂing that the Student continued to
exhibit the same weaknesses as reported in October 2012. Homework completion and
organization continued to be an area of concem. The Student continued to lack focus,
asking some relevant questions but oﬁ‘en also asking many irrelevant questions in class. In
most cases the Student would not follow along with reviewing assignments in class and he
was not advocating for himself. The Student continued to require constant monitoring and
focusing, and he could antagonize his peers. He required much support in his classes. His
class behavior and work production were areas of weakness, and he needed maintenance
and redirection to avoid distracting others. It was also noted that the Student continued to
experience social issues when interacting with his peers. [Testimony Special Education
Teacher, Exhibit P-54]

While the Student had a remarkable history of behavioral issues, the May 20, 2013 IEP
indicated not applicable on the portion of the IEP fonn “[ﬂor students whose behavior
impedes his/her learning or that of others, the PPT has considered strategies, including
positive behavior intewentions and supports to address that behavior.” [Exhibit B—lO]
Based on the records reviewed, as well as her evaluation, D11 Best concluded that the
Student’s behavior impedes his learning and she would have recommended that the Student
have a behavior intervention plan based on the disciplinary reports that she had reviewed.
[Testimony Dr. Best]

During the PPT meeting, the discussion of the program for the 10‘" grade year concerned
what other options there were to try at the high school for 10‘h grade, as the Board High
School did not have a team model aﬁer 9‘h grade. [Testimony Special Education Teacher]
The Board staff continued to tly to ﬁt the Student into existing programs, rather than
programming for his unique needs.

10

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

35.

36.

37.

38.

The Autism Consultant who conducted the limited behavioral obsewation did not suggest
collecting additional data on behaviors at the PPT meeting or in the report of her
observation. [Testimony Mother; Exhibits P-SO, B—lO]

During the 2012-13 school year, the Social Worker failed to provide more than half of her
services in accordance with the Student’s IEP. This failure to implement the required hours
of services, in accordance with the IEP and necessary for the Student’s progress were
outlined in the social worker log. The log indicates many dates that were missed and not
made up. For example, in January, only two sessions were conducted the entire month. In
February, March and April, the Student was seen by the Social Worker only three times
each month, although at that time he was on a twice weekly schedule for social work
sewiees. While the Student’s social worker services were supposed to increase to .5 hours
per week, he was not provided these services, even though the Social Worker thought that
the increase in the services would be beneﬁcial to the Student to have enough time to focus
on the goals in the IEP. The Social Worker kept no data on the Student’s progress, with the
exception of her leg which indicates the many sessions which were missed. The Social
Worker failed to suggest a revision to the Student’s program to ensure that he attended all of
his social work scssions,just leaving it up to the Student to refer to his planner and show up,
01' not show up, for his sessions. [Testimony Social Worker; Exhibits P-30a, B—1 1]

The Student’s progress during the 2012-13 was inappropriate, and admittedly described by
Board staff as unsuccessful. The Student failed one semester of English, one semester of
biology, world studies, PE and health, ending the year with a GPA of 0.9273. Of his barely
passing grades, at least some of them were bumped up to a D by the teachers, although he
had earned failing grades. For example, in English his third quarter grade was 68, his fourth
quarter grade was 67 and his ﬁnal exam was a 43. The Special Education Teacher didn’t
recall if this was one of the grades that were bumped up so that the Student would pass the
second semester of English. The Special Education Teacher wanted to reward the Student
with passing grades and testiﬁed that “A 64 to me is a 65 which is passing.” [Testimony
Special Education Teacher, Exhibit B—36] The Student’s GPA declined over the course of
the 2012—13 school year. [Exhibits B—12, B36]

The Student’s ﬁnal grades for the 2012-13 school year were:
Aerospace Sem. 1: 80
Aerospace Sem. 2: 80
English Sem. 1: 60
English Sem. 2: 65
Biology Sem. 1: 62
Biology Sem. 2: 66
Resource Sem. 1: 78
Resource Sem. 2: 71
World Studies Sem. 1: 56
World Studies Sem. 2: 47
Pre Algebra Sem. 1: 71
Pre Algebra Sem. 2: 67
Phys. Ed: 60

ll

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14-0069

39.

40.

41.

42.

Health: 63
[Exhibit 13—36]

The ﬁnal grade that the Special Education Teacher gave the Student was imprecise and
confusing, even to the Special Education Teacher. The Student’s grades in resource for the
second semester were a 68 for the third quatter and a 70 for the fouith quaiter. Although the
Student took no ﬁnal exam, he was listed as being awarded an 80 for a ﬁnal exam. The
Special Education Teacher testiﬁed that no ﬁnal exam was completed, but that this ﬁnal
exam grade was based on the Student’s work completed during the semester, although his
work average was a 69 for the semester. Therefore, the Student’s ﬁnal grade of 71 for
resource was not indicative of his work in the resource class and merely a contrived and
inaccurate grade. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit B—36]

During the 2012—13 school year, the Student was subjected to discipline in a number of
incidents which were related to behavior which was a manifestation of his disability, but
these disciplinaly incidents were never subject to a manifestation determination, nor did it
result in the Board convening a PPT to address these issues. His disciplinary histoty during
this school year included:

A detention for failure to sewe detentions from the gym teacher. 10/ 15/ 12

A detention for skipping activity in gym classes. 10/12, 10/15, 10/16

A one day in school suspension for inappropriate touching of a female student. 10/26

A one day in school suspension for being AWOL from gym class. 11/29, 11/30

A one day in school suspension for being AWOL from gym class. 12/15, 12/16

A one day in school suspension for being AWOL from gym class. 12/ 12

A detention for using inappropriate language in class. 2/26

A 2 day in school suspension for coming late from the nurse’s ofﬁce and ongoing

deﬁant behavior. 3/5

A 2 day in school suspension for misuse of computer in resource room, 3/25;

disruptive and distracting behavior in science class, 3/22 and using personal

computer inappropriate in class, 3/28.

j. A one day in school suspension for refusing to con‘ect a test with suppoﬂ from the
special education teacher and swearing at a female student, 5/9.

k. A 3 day out of school suspension for inappropriate contact and Violation of personal
space with a female student, 5/16.

1. A 9 day out of school suspension for inappropriate touching and insubordination.

5/23. [Exhibits B—l3, B-14]

P‘qermr-Lep‘s»

Some of the referrals, including the March 5 referral for returning late from the nurse’s
ofﬁce resulting in an in school suspension, based upon a written refen‘al from the Student’s
Special Education Teacher, despite her knowledge of his disability which resulted in this
behavior. [Testimony Special Education Teacher] The Student was punished for the
behavior that resulted from his disability.

The Special Education Teacher testiﬁed that during the 9‘h grade school year the Student
wasn’t using the resource room productively. The Special Education Teacher refen‘ed the

12

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

43.

44.

45.

46‘

Student for discipline for failing to use the resource room productively, which resulted in a 2
day in—school suspension. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit P-25] This is a
wholly inappropriate manner to respond to the Student’s behavioral issues. These issues
were reponedly so serious that the Student was being suspended, but the Board staff failed
to convene a PPT meeting, did not have a behavior intervention plan and failed to assess the
Student through a functional behavioral assessment.

The last nine day out of school suspension during the 2012-13 resulted from an incident that
occrm'ed when the Student was with a group of other students at lunch. During some
laughing and “gooﬁng around” the Student said that if they think what they were discussing
was funny, this is really funny, and he impulsively touched a girl’s breast. The disciplinary
incident prior to this one was similar, when the Student was suspended three days for
rubbing his leg against a girl’s leg. [Testimony Mother]

Despite the prevalent behavior issues, which culminated in a nine day out of school
suspension from May 28 to June 7, the staff failed to appropriately address the Student’s
serious behavioral issues. The Social Worker did not come to any of the Student’s classes to
work on behavior, the school psychologist was not working with the student at all, and after
the last out of school suspension, no manifestation determination meeting was convened.
[Testimony Special Education Teacher, Social Worker; Exhibits B—l3, 13-14]

When the Student began on the 9‘h grade Special Education Teacher’s caseload, she did not
receive a behavior plan for the Student, although it was well documented that the Student
had behavioral problems in not recognizing that he made mistakes and maintaining
appropriate personal space. The Special Education Teacher and the Social Worker created a
short—lived behavioral plan, which identiﬁed two behaviors relating to attention, and
required the Student to get teachers’ signatures in each class. He would get a reward at the
end of the week if he achieved the goal. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit P—
45] The shoﬁ—lived classroom plan which lasted for approximately three weeks in late April
and early May was aimed at providing the Student with rewards for responding to teacher
directives to continue classwork and refraining from distracting behaviors. This plan didn’t
change the Student’s behavior so the Special Education Teacher terminated using the plan.
[Testimony Mother, Special Education Teacher; Exhibits P-45, B—1 5]

During the 2012—13 school year, the Mother and School staff had extensive email
communications, numbering in the many hundreds. Oﬁen the emails indicated frustration
on both sides. Often the School staff attempted to elicit suggestions from the Mother on
how to handle things, noting that the Student was getting nothing accomplished at school,
just sitting there, or asking the Mother to assist in follow up with homework. Many of the
email communications were initiated by the Board, seeking the Mother’s input into how to
solve ongoing problems at schools [Testimony Mother, Exhibit B—18] Lack of homework
completion was an ongoing, continuous issue during 91" grade. [Testimony Mother] The
Special Education Teacher reported that she had frequent communication with the Mother
about assignments and homework, employing the emails to the Mother as a strategy to help
the Student in achieving his goal. [Testimony Special Education Teacher] Teaching study
skills by having the Mother remind and monitor the Student was not an appropriate strategy

13

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

to use for a high school Student to complete homework, and was not working towards self-
1'eliance 01' independence in this important task of homework completion,

Aﬁer the Student was suspended for nine days in May 2013, the sergeant/teacher of the
aerospace class/ROTC told the Student to return his uniform at end of school year and told
the Student he was not to come back. The ten day suspension occun‘ed two weeks before
ﬁnal exams. [Testimony Mother]

The Student’s current GPA at the end of the 2012-13 school year was a 0.9273. He failed
biology, world studies, English, PE and health according to the grades after the ﬁnal fourth
qualter marking period. He is repeating the courses during this 2013-14 school year.
[Testimony Mother, Exhibit B-36]

The Special Education Teacher provided a repent of the Student’s progress on the lEP goals
to the parents on June 15, 2013. She reported that the Student had made limited progress on
Goal one, the organization, study skills and leaming strategies goal. Despite the continued
and pewasive problems with attention and focus, the Special Education Teacher reported
that the Student had mastered the goal two of demonstrating an improvement in attending
skills necessary to learn effectively in the school environment and progress toward
achieving the learning standards. The Student made “limited progress” in goal three,
demonstrating organization and study skills in order to participate successfully in academic
classes, with no progress in the objective made on demonstrating self—advocacy skills by
planning with classroom teachers for academic and behavior needs. In the social/behavior
goal four of demonstrating age appropriate behavior in the school setting, the Student made
limited progress, also making limited progress in the goal of identifying and building on
areas of personal strength. It was noted that in goal six, the Student made satisfactory
progress in his exploration of careers and Vocations in the class with the guidance counselor
leading the group of 9'h graders. These reported goals were the goals which were drafted at
the May 20, 2013 PPT meeting and implemented on May 27, 2013, so the Student was
being evaluated on about one week of school attendance aﬁer sewing his out of school
suspension. In her testimony the Special Education Teacher indicated that alter further
consideration, the progress, such as mastering attention and focus, might not have been
appropriately i‘epmted. [Testimony Special Education Teacher, Exhibit P-SS]

The Student concluded the year with a grade point average of less than 1, based on some
grades that had been modiﬁed, and he had serious and prevalent behavioral issues and
difﬁculty in applying the study skills that the Special Education T eaeher was attempting to
teach him. The Special Education Teacher Iesliﬁed Ilia! the 2012-13 school year was not (I
successful yearfar the Students [Testimony Special Education Teacher]

In J uly 2013, the Parents requested this Due Process Heating.

In September 2013, the Board’s Test of Written Language, Founh Edition (T OWL-4) was
completed. [Exhibit B-16]

14

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No 14—0069

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

In September 2013, Mary Best, pediatric neuropsychologist completed an assessment of the
Student. In the background of the evaluation, the neuropsychologist noted that the Student
was adopted as an infant and that his birth mother had a long history of stmggling with
drugs and alcohol. The Student’s General Ability Index Score (GAI) on the Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children-IV (WlSC-IV) was an 82, which is in the low average range.
It was noted that his processing speed was 70, in the borderline range, which was a
signiﬁcant weakness in his proﬁle. The Student’s scores on academic tests indicated delays
in reading comprehension and math problem solving, which was consistent with his CMT
scores and prior testing. This indicated to the evaluator that the Student meets criteria for a
Learning Disorder NOS. It was also noted that the Student had a very signiﬁcant weakness
on tests of attention and executive function, and continues to meet criteria for ADHD,
combined type. Despite taking medication as prescribed during the evaluation, the Student
continued to show signiﬁcant difﬁculty with sustaining and directing his attention when
engaged in cognitive tasks, which makes his performance across cognitive and academic
tasks inconsistent. It was fuﬂher noted that in terms of executive functioning the Student
has several challenges. He has difﬁculty taking big problems and breaking them down into
a logical sequence. He also has signiﬁcant problems with organizing his thoughts and
materials even with signiﬁcant external cues and assistance. [Exhibit 8-17]

Dr. Best observed the Student in the waiting room at the begimting 0f the evaluation. At
that time he was playing with the toys which were in the waiting room for much younger
children under the age of 5, geared towards toddlers and young children. The
Neuropsychologist also noted that the Student was vety physical, hugging and kissing the
Mother every time be separated from his Mother in a manner that was exaggerated for a 15
year old boy, but more consistent with a 2 to 4 year old child. [Testimony Dr. Best]

In the neuropsychological evaluation it was noted that the Student’s biggest challenge was
managing his impulses. Noting that he has signiﬁcant trouble con‘eetly judging appropriate
behavior, boundaries and the effect of his actions on others, the evaluator also found that the
Student is able to empathize but not able to use the information prior to acting and is unable
to predict the outcome until it is too late. He lacks the ability to recognize common themes

and therefore cannot apply the lesson he has been taught in the moment. [Exhibit B—l7]

The neuropsychologist noted that the Student’s signiﬁcant impulsivity, poor social
judgment, learning problems and mild but persistent cognitive deﬁcits closely matches the
profile of other children who have been exposed to alcohol in utero. Students with this
proﬁle, the neuropsychologist explained, are at a high risk for making poor judgments in
relation to other students which may cause them to get into signiﬁcant trouble. While she
noted that a defutitive diagnosis of Fetal Alcohol Effects may be difficult, it could be
pursued at a Fetal Alcohol Clinic. [Testimony Dr. Best, Exhibit B-17] The Board did not
agree to provide a fetal alcohol assessment at the PPT meeting because it was a medical

assessment. [Testimony Facilitator]

Dr. Best recommended a school program that has a “highly integrative and collaborative

approach,” which would p1‘0v1de the Student with suppott for his “signiﬁcant behavioral and
social challenges” as well as academic support and remediation. He also needs a

15

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

58‘

59.

60,

61.

62.

comprehensive behavior modiﬁcation plan, which is most easily done in a small group
setting. [Exhibit B—17] Dr. Best noted that his social and behavioral problems are highly
related to his learning, and that the Student requires behavioral intervention and social
suppm’t in a small group setting. He requires positive modeling, reinforcement and
feedback, as well as academic support in reading comprehension and math, assistive
technology for his problems with ﬁne motor skills and visual motor integration and social
skills training. He needs reinforcement and feedback, lather than a punishment model. He
requires a comprehensive behavior modiﬁcation plan, which was not in place for the
Student at the time of his evaluation. Dr. Best recommended that a functional behavioral
assessment [FBA] be conducted to fully understand what incidents are triggering and what
reactions are reinforcing the pattern. He would require a comprehensive assessment, to
provide a plan that would be consistent across all of the classrooms, with continuing
monitoring to assess behavior. This assessment would look at the speciﬁc behaviors and
determine an antecedent, a description of behavior and the consequences of behavior.
With that information the three elements could be analyzed to prevent the triggering of
target behavior and ways to circumvent reinforcement of negative behaviors. [Testimony

D1: Best]

The neuropsychologist is an experienced practitioner, who has substantial experience in
neuropsychology including neuropsychological evaluations of children in educational
settings, as well as in hospital settings. She is cun‘ently an Assistant Clinical Professor at the
Yale Child Study Center, Pediatric Neuropsychology Clinic at Yale. Her testimony and
evaluation were persuasive and useful in understanding the Student’s educational needs.
[Exhibits 13—17, 8—23]

On September 20, 2013, several months after this Due Process Hearing was requested, the
PPT convened to review/revise the IEP and for a “program review.” After review of Dr.
Best’s evaluation, the Board offered the high school self—eontained program to the Student.
The Parent declined this offer and requested placement at Glenholme. [Exhibit B—24]

The Board SecondaIy Supervisor recommended the self-contained program for the Student
as it was the “next logical program for us to tly.” [Testimony Secondary Supervisor]

The program offered to the Student in September 2013 aﬁer this hearing was requested was
not appropriate, according to Dr. Best. The program would need more social skills suppon,
more comprehensive social skills goals and behavioral intewentions and additional
academic support and goals in math problem solving and reading comprehension skills. Dr.
Best opined that the Student required an all day self—contained program. [Testimony D1:
Best]

Although the Parents invoked stay put, the Student’s current program at the Board high
school is a combination of the May 2013 and September 2013 IEPs. If a new teacher came
on board neither document would reference his cuITent program being provided to him by
the Board as neither one describes his program. [Testimony Secondary Supervisor] The
Student is cun'ently in his second year at the Board high school, but the Parent doesn’t know

16

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

whether he is considered a freshmen or a sophomore since he did not earn many 01‘ his
credits his ﬁrst year at school due to failing many of his classes. [Testimony Mother]

63. The Parent is seeking placement of the Student at Devereux Glenholme in Washington,
Connecticut. Glenholme is a therapeutic boarding school for students age 10 to 21 years
old. The mission of Glenholme is to develop and foster the care of the students and to foster
their academic, social and emotional well—being to a life of self-dependence. Many of the
students need social skills training at Glenholme as they are socially awkward. They
experienced teasing and bulling in the past, some have some school refusal, many misread
social cues and are immature. Glenholme is a state-approved program. The program at
Glenholme uses an in vivo approach to treatment, providing constant reinforcement
throughout the student’s day, a treatment approach supported and based on research.
[Testimony Glenholme Admissions Director]

64. Dr. Best discussed the residential placement with the Admissions Director at Glenholme.
The staff at Glenholme had said that they felt that the Student’s needs were more
comprehensive and substantial than they would be able to address in day program. The
Glenholme admission director said that Glenholme therapeutic staff discussed that the
residential program would be the only program that they could offer as the day program was
not comprehensive enough. [Testimony Dr. Best]

65. The admission team at Glenholme discussed the Student’s past behaviors and noted that he
needed a great deal of social skills assistance and cuing. His personal boundary issues were
found to be disconcerting, and Glenholme couldn’t provide what the Student needed just as
a day student. The Glenliolme clinical team’s opinion was that the Student would beneﬁt

from the positive—based, 24 hour structured therapeutic environment in a program that they
would individualize to meet his needs. [Testimony Admissions Director, Exhibit P—74]

DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:

The Parents brought this action in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Improvement Act [IDEA] which provides for special education and related services to
children with disabilities, from birth through age 21. it is undisputed that the Student is entitled
to receive a free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) with special education and related
services under the disability category of Other Health Impaired.

The Supreme Count standard for determining whether a Board has provided a free
appropriate public education is set forth as a two-part inquiry in Board of Education of the

Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 US. 176 (1982). It must first be

17

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14-0069

determined whether the Board complied with the procedural requirements of the Act. The
second inquiry is a determination of whethei‘ the Individualized Education Program [IEP] is
“reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁts.” 458 US. at 206—207.
With respect to the ﬁrst prong of Rowley, procedural ﬂaws do not automatically require a
ﬁnding of a denial of a free appropriate public education. Procedural inadequacies resulting in
the loss ofeducation opportunity 01‘ seriously infringing on the parent’s oppottunity to participate
in formulating the individual education program, clearly result in a denial of FAPE. Shapiro v.
Paradise Valley Unified School District No. 69, 317 F. 3d 1072, 38 IDELR 91 (9“‘ Cir. 2003),
citing W. G.Board of Trustees of Target Range School District N01 23, 960 F. 2d 1479 (9th Cir.
1999), accord, WA. vi Pascarella, 153 F. Supp. 2d 144 (D. Conn. 2001) The procedural ﬂaws
resulted in a loss of educational opportunity to the Student. Despite the Student’s pervasive
behavioral difﬁculties which resulted in many disciplinary actions, the Board failed to convene a
PPT to revise the Student’s IEP and failed to convene a PPT to conduct a manifestation
determination, although the Student’s multiple disciplinary removals constituted a change in
placement which would trigger a manifestation review. The Board’s responsibility to convene a
manifestation determination was triggered as the Student’s behavior was substantially similar to
behavior in the previous incidents that resulted in the series 01‘ removals (out of school
suspensions) which exceeded 10 days and were in close proximity to each other 34 CFR
§300.536 This failure to convene a manifestation determination denied the Student FAPE. An
appropriate manifestation review would have concluded that the conduct was a manifestation of
the Student’s disability. As a result of this conclusion, the PPT would have had to conduct an

FBA and implement a behavioral intervention plan for the Student and return the Student to the

18

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case N01 14—0069

placement unless the Parent and the Board agreed to a change of placement as part of the
behavioral intervention plan. 34 CFR §300.530

The Board also failed to appropriately implement his program in the 2012—13 school year.
depriving the Student of necessary social work services which were omitted on many occasions.
The Board agreed to conduct evaluations in May 2013, but delayed the evaluations unnecessarily
and inappropriately.

With respect to the second prong 0f Rowley, an IEP must provide for a special education
program that opens the door of education for a student with a disability in a “meaningful” way.
Rowley, 458 US at 192; Walczak v, Florida Union Free Sch. Dist, 142 F.3d 119, 130 (1998)
This is not done if an lEP affords the opportunity for only “trivial advancement.” DTF, v
Ramapo Central Sch. Dist, 430 F.3d 595 (2"d Cir. 2995); Walczak, 142 F.3d at 130. Cypress-
Fairbanks Indept Sch. Dist. v, Michael F., 118 F,3d 245 (5“1 Cir. 1997). Based on the testimony
presented and the evidence submitted, it cannot be found that the Student’s program during the
2011—12 school year was inappropriate. The Student’s concerns and needs in that school year
were similar to the ones he would experience during his 9th grade year, but his behaviora1
incidents were not as frequent, his homework completion was not as deﬁcient and his grades
were not failing. The Board wholly failed to meet this second prong 0f Rowley during the 2012-
13 school year and in the program offered for the 2013-14 school year. The Student had a
completely unsuccessful year in the 2012—13 school year, failing to progress in his goals, with
goals that were poorly drafted and implemented, experiencing frequent behavioral difﬁculties
and failing many of his classes even when some of the grades were bumped up to a passing
grade. The Student experienced less than trivial advancement in his IEP and the manner in

which it was implemented. His social work services were poorly conceived and not

19

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14—0069

appropriately implemented. He was supposed to be placed in co—taught classes for 9‘h grade, but
was not placed in the all co-taught academic classes at the beginning of the year because some of
those classes weren’t offered on his Freshmen Academy team. The offered program for the
2013—14 was not appropriate, not directed at the Student’s needs, not aimed at providing the
Student meaningful educational benefit, and was directed at trying unsuccessfully to ﬁt the
Student with his unique needs into the Board’s existing programs.

Too often the Board tried to ﬁt the Student into one of their programs rather than
addressing the Student’s unique needs. The Board witnesses also continued to parrot the same
phrase that LRE is a continuum, but their understanding of this was ﬂawed. 11‘ a student’s
placement does not confer a meaningful beneﬁt to the student and a more restrictive program is
likely to provide such a benefit, the student is entitled to be placed in that more restrictive
program, P. v, Newingron Board ofEducation, 51 IDELR 2 (2"d Cir. 2008) The LRE continuum
is not a progressive step by step process, wherein you must await failure to move into a more
restrictive setting. It is a continuum, not a step ladder. If the Student cannot receive educational
beneﬁt from a panicular placement, a more restrictive placement should be considered. Pach/ v.
Seagren, 46 IDELR l (8['1 Cir 2006), Greenwood v, Wimahick School Dislricr, 50 IDELR 280
(ED. Pa. 2008)

The IEP offered in May 2013 was inappropriate. The program offered prior to the
Parents’ ﬁling of the Due Process Hearing Request is the IEP that was challenged in this case.
The adequacy of the IEP must be evaluated prospectively at the time of the placement was
offered and may not consider retrospective testimony regarding services not listed in the
challenged IEP, R.E, v. New York City Board ofEducalion, 694 F.3d 167, 59 IDELR 241 (2”

Cir. 2013) By requiring school districts to put their efforts into creating adequate IEPS at the

20

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No, 14-0069

outset, [the IDEA] prevents a school district from effecting this type of 'bait and switch,’ even if
the baiting is done unintentionally. Id. The request for hearing was submitted in July 2013. At
the time of the request for hearing, the IEP offered by the Board was the one proposed in May
2013.

Nevertheless, even considering the proposed IEP of September 2013, the IEP for the
Student for the 2013—14 school year was inappropriate. The Board has demonstrated that it is
unable to provide appropriate and effective social work sewices to the Student. The
neuropsychologist noted several deﬁcits in the proposed program that make it an inappropriate
program for the Student. The proposed IEP once again would set the Student up for continued
failure.

The Parents were unable to place the Student at the requested placement at the beginning
ofthe 2013-14 school year, but was seeking Board funding of the placement of the Student at
Glenhohne. Compensatory education can be awarded to a child who has not aged out of or
otherwise been exited from eligibility under the IDEA without a ﬁnding that there had been a
gross violation of the IDEA. P. v. Newington, 512 F.Supp. 2d 89, 112 n. 13 (D.Conn. 2007)
Here, as the Student remains eligible for special education, compensatory education can be
ordered without a ﬁnding ofa gross Violation of his rights.

Under the standards set out in P. v. Newington Board ofEducaﬂon, procedural violations
that deprive the parents of a meaningful opportunity to patticipate in developing an IEP and/or
failure to provide a special education program that provides FAPE or fails to comply with 20
U.S.C. § l412(a)(5)(A) requires an award of compensatory education. Here, as the violations of

the Student’s procedural rights and substantive 1'i ghts are clear, a remedial order must enter.

21

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14-0069

The appropriate compensatory education is such relief that focuses on restoring the
disabled child to the same position he would have been in but for the school district’s IDEA
violations. Reid v. District of Columbia, 401 F. 3d 516 (D.C.Cir. 2005); Burr v. Ambach, 863
F.2d 1071, 1078 (2d Cir. 1988), vacated and remanded sub. nom Saba! v. Burr, 492 US. 902,
reaﬂ'd after remand, 888 F . 2d 258 (2d Cir. 1989); Brennan v. Regional Sch. Disl., 2008 WL
220751 (D. Conn. 2008) The Student has been deprived of FAPE for the 2012—13 school year.
The Board failed to propose an appropriate program for the 2013-14 school year, therefore
resulting in a denial of FAPE.

The Parents seek a residential placement at the Glenholme School for the remainder of
the 2013-14 school year as the order for compensatory education in this case. Such an order is
an appropriate remedy for the Board’s failure to offer and provide an appropriate program for the
Student for the 2012-13 school year and for the Board’s failure to offer an appropriate program
for the 2013-14 school year. The Student shall be placed in the residential program at Devereux
Glenholme School, a state approved special education school, for the remainder of‘ the 2013-14
school year, including the extended school year 2014.

In addition, in accordance with IDEA, the Board shall pay for the cost of an assessment
of the Student at a fetal alcohol clinic to determine if the Student has the diagnosis offetal
alcohol effects. The Board was incorrect in denying the payment of this evaluation because it
was "medical.” The IDEA provides that the Students shall be assessed "in all areas related to the
suspected disability, including, ifappropriate, health, Vision, hearing, social and emotional status,
general intelligence, academic performance, communicative status, and motor abilities." 34 CFR
Sect 300.304(c)(4) In evaluating the students under this section, there is a requirement that "the

evaluation is sufﬁciently comprehensive to identify all of the child‘s special education and

22

January 7, 2014 Final Decision and Order, Case No. 14-0069

related service needs, whether or not commonly linked to the disability category in which the
child has been classified." 34 CFR Sec. 300.304(c)(6) The hearing ofﬁcer has the authority to
order evaluations as part of a hearing order. Regs. Conn. Agencies Sec. 10—76h-13 The Board
shall provide funding for the evaluation 01" the Student for fetal alcohol effects 10 better
understand the Student's educational needs and his disability by a physician located within 75

miles of Danbury and recommended by Dr. Best.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
x

1. The Board did not deny the Student FAPE for the 201 1-12 school year.
2. The Board denied the Student FAPE for the 2012-13 school year.
3. The Board failed to offer the Student FAPE for the 2013-14 school year.

4. The Student shall be placed at Devereux Glenholme School as a residential student for the
remainder of the 2013-14 school year, including the extended school year 2014,

6. The Board shall fund an assessment of the Student at a fetal alcohol clinic within 75 miles of
Danbury by a provider recommended and selected by Dlt Best.

23

