January 21, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0333

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v_ Wilton Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Gerry McMahon
Law Ofﬁces of Gerry McMahon, LLC
98 Mill Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT 0681 l

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christopher Tracey
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

An expedited special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by
Student’s Attorney Via letter dated January 3, 2014.1 It was ﬁled with the Due Process Unit on
January 3. The deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is February 17, 2014.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on January 8. Attorney McMahon
appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney Tracey appeared on behalf of BOE.

The request for hearing alleges that BOE failed to develop and implement a free
appropriate educational program (FAPE) for Student and failed to identify the extent of his
disabilities and their impact on social and peer relationships, which resulted in bullying. The
request for hearing alleges that Student was suspended in November 2013, that BOE’S
manifestation determination concluded that the conduct was not a manifestation of Student’s
disability, and that Student has been excluded from school since his suspension. The request for
hearing alleges BOE failed to provide Student FAPE over three academic years.

Following a discussion as to what issues can be heard in an expedited hearing, Attorney
McMahon indicated that she would like the challenge to the manifestation determination to be
bifurcated from the other issues for purposes of the expedited hearing. Attorney McMahon was
advised that she could ﬁle a separate request for hearing on the issues not relating to the
manifestation determination.

Attorney Tracey requested that Attorney McMahon amend the request for hearing to
more fully identify the procedural and/or substantive allegations surrounding the challenge to the
manifestation determination. The Hearing Ofﬁcer did not order Student’s Attorney to amend the
request for hearing.

The following issues were identiﬁed for the expedited hearing:

1. Did the Board of Education err in determining that Student’s behavior was not a
manifestation of his disability?
2. If the answer to Issue One is in the afﬁrmative, what shall be the remedy?

' All dales are 2014 unless otherwise indicated.

Hearings were scheduled for January 22 and January 29.

Via e-mail dated J anuary 15, Student’s Attorney indicated that the parties reached an
agreement on the manifestation determination claim for which Student’s Parents ﬁled an
expedited hearing. Student’s Parents requested dismissal only of the request for an expedited
hearing on the manifestation determination. Student’s Parents sought to retain the right to ﬁle a
separate request for hearing on any issues not relating to the manifestation determination.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned expedited case which was limited to the issue of
whether the Board of Education erred in determining that Student’s behavior was not a
manifestation of his disability is dismissed.

' ifthg local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school distn'ct responsible for
' , "groyiding special education for the student Icqtﬁring spcéial education docs not take

action'on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬂccn days after .
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropri_ate action to enforce the

findings or-prcscription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

. Appeals from the healing decision ofthe hearing ofﬁcer may be‘made to state or federal
coun by either party in accprdanco with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
Gcn§ral Statutcs, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

' g Ofﬁcer Signature

Q‘F‘vN l5 (2- .{SEifo-M

. Hcédng Ofﬁcsr Name in Print .

signpagcdoc (ho disk
4/1/04 ” "

 

 

