December 10, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0183

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V, Westpmt Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents, pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berehem, Moses & Devlin, PC.

75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Whether the Board’s proposed program for the Student for summer 2013 and the 2013—14 school year is
appropriate;

2. If not, whether the Parents’ unilateral placement of the Student at Easton Country Day School for
summer 2013 and the 2013—14 school year is appropriate and shall be reimbursed.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/DISCUSSION:

The Board received this request for hearing on September 19, 2013 and a preheating conference convened on
September 23, 2013. At the prehearing conference the parties stated that they agreed to mediation, and the
mediation was tentatively scheduled for October 9, 2013. The parties agreed to a November 14, 2013 hearing
date, which was scheduled in accordance with the palties’ request. At the time of the preheating conference,
the Parents were represented by an attorney. Prior to the November 14, 2013 hearing date, the Board’s attorney
submitted a joint request from the Board and the Parents’ attorney that the hearing date be postponed and that
the parties be granted a 30 day extension of the mailing date of the decision so that the parties would have time
to ﬁnalize a settlement agreement. The hearing was postponed to December 9, 2013 at the request of both

parties.

On December 2, 2013 the Parents’ attorney submitted a request for postponement of the December 6, 2013
hearing date so that the palties could ﬁnalize the settlement agreement. In accordance with Section 10-7611-9 of
the Regs. Conn. Agencies, this request was denied. The regulation provides that the hearing ofﬁcer shall not
have the authority to grant any ﬁuther postponements or extensions for continued settlement discussions after

the ﬁrst such extension is granted.

On December 3, 2013 the Parents’ attorney submitted a notice of Termination of Representation in which it was
noted that the attorney no longer represents the Student and the Parents in this matter. On December 9, 2013
the hearing convened. At the hearing the Parents and the Board’s Attorney were present. The Parents stated on
the record that they had come to an agreement with the Board and that they were now withdrawing their request
for hearing with prejudice. The Parents stated that they were voluntarily entering into this agreement with the
Board and afﬁrmed that they understood the agreement and were proceeding without an attorney. Therefore,
this matter is dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requin'ng special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescn‘ption of the hearing officer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescn’ption of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either patty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

/i' /i§7‘// /
/ L '//,/// /

 

Attorney Mary Elizabeth Oppenheim
Hearing Ofﬁcer

 

