December 26, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0189

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney Tracey Spencer Walsh
Mayerson & Associates
330 West 38th Street, Suite 600
New York, NY 19918

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler
Assistant Town Attorney
Town of Greenwich
10] Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

a“

1. Was the Individualized Education Program (IEP) not designed to address Student 3 present
levels of performance” at the stat of the 2013—20] 4 school year?
2. Did the District fail to include any meaningful input from Student’s parents with regard to
Student’s “Present Levels of Academic Achievement and Functional Performance”?

3. Did the District convene an IEP meeting without ﬁrst timely and properly evaluating and
assessing Student’s “Present Levels of Academic Achievement and Functional Performance”?
4. Did the District fail to develop critical assessment 1'epo1ts that should have been used as the basis
for development of the IEP, including but not limited to a meaningful base-lining of Student’s then-
existing functional and skill levels?

5. Did the District fail to offer an adequate and appropriate frequency and duration of speech and
language instruction to address Student’s communication deﬁcits, by offering only one hour per week of
group speech and language instruction in a therapy room, and no individualized speech therapy?
6. Did the District fail to offer an adequate and appropriate frequency and duration of
individualized instruction to address Student’s reading and writing skills, by offering only group
instruction even though Student struggles to learn only in a group setting?
7. Was the District’s recommended program and placement inappropriate and not ready, willing
and able to fulﬁll Student’s IEP service mandates by trained and properly supewised personnel?

8‘ Did the District fail to assess or consider whether the methodology used at the proposed
placement (Riverside Elementary School) would be effective for Student?
9. Did the Planning and Placement Team (“PPT”) fail to create a Behavior Intervention Plan
(“BIP”) or interim behavior plan despite documentation identifying Student’s behavior issues?

10. Did the District fail to conduct a Functional Behavior Assessment (upon which a proper BIP is
based) 1" or Student, despite the reports about his interfering behaviors?

December 26, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0189

1 1. Did the District’s teachers and related sewice providers and other support personnel lack the
training and expeltise needed to properly educate Student?
12. Were the staff at the District’s proposed placement not adequately trained or supervised to

address Student’s unique needs?

13. Does the proposed IEP and program lack provision for adequate collaboration and
communication between all of Student’s teachers and providers, and his parents?

14. D0 union contracts and agency agreements preclude or restrict collaboration and communication
between Student’s service providers and with Student’s parents?

15. Did the District failed to convene a duly constituted IEP team?

16. Does the IEP fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s literacy deﬁcits?

17. Does the IEP fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s deﬁcits in written language?
18. Does the IEP fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s math deﬁcits?

19. Does the IEP fail to offer any student-to-teacher ratio, appropriate 01' othetwise?

20. Does the IEP program fail to offer Student a small classroom and small student—to—teacher ratio,
despite the fact that Student needs a small learning environment in order to make meaningful progress
across all domains?

21. Does the IEP not appropriately 01‘ adequately address Student’s learning disability. ADD,
executive function deﬁcits, and social/emotional deﬁcits and does it not promote meaningful progress
for Student?

22. Is the general education environment proposed by the IEP inappropriate for Student as the pace
and complexity of the language are beyond Student’s ability to process and comprehend and is not
“reasonably calculated”?

23. Does the IEP fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s unique learning needs and
consequently he is unavailable to meaningfully access 01' derive any meaningful beneﬁt from being with
typically developing peers?

24. Are IEP “supports and services” inadequate and inappropriate for Student to successfully access
the general education curriculum?

25. Does the IEP fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s organizational deﬁcits?

26. Does the IEP fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s difficulties with transitions
and have no plan to assist Student with transitioning from one activity to another?

27. Does IEP fail to provide for direct instruction for Student instead of providing only for “group”
instruction?

28. Did the District fail to offer adequate levels of related services?

29. Did the District fail to provide requisite consistency in programming?

30. Did the District fail to give any meaningful consideration to supporting Student’s use of an
assistive technology device?

31. Did the IEP fail to recognize or address Student’s handwriting and ﬁne motor deﬁcits by stating
that Student’s ﬁne motor skills are “age appropriate”?
32. Did the IEP fail to offer any services to help Student with interfering behaviors in the home or

community when it was reported that, “[Student] displays a signiﬁcant number of disruptive, impulsive
and aggTessive behaviors” outside of school?

33. Is the IEP inappropriate because it mandates only one thirty—minute counseling session per week
for Student, which is an inadequate sewice that is not designed to promote progress?

December 26, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14—0189

34. Is the IEP inappropriate because it fails to provide for a transition plan to assist Student in
transitioning to a new school, Riverside Elementary School when the district is aware that Student has
behavior issues?

35. Did the PPT fail to meaningfully consider any programs or placements that would

be appropriate for Student?

36. Did the District fail to meaningfully include Student’s parents in the IEP development and
placement selection process, as required by statute and Winkelman?

37. Did the District adhere to policy, custom or practices that precluded individualization of
Student’s IEP and program when Student’s lack of success in the offered program was documented?
38. Did the District fail to meaningfully include Student’s parents in the IEP development process?
39. Did the District fail to meaningfully consider private evaluations, assessments and other reports
and take them into account in the development of the IEP?

40. Did the PPT fail to offer any Orton—Gillingham reading program for Student, despite the fact it
was a program that was promoting reading progress for Student?

4]. Did the District misstate Student’s actual progress in reports and at meetings with Student’s
parents?

42. Did the District fail to properly train and supervise teachers and providers?

43. Did the PPT team fail to assess and/or otherwise meaningfully consider what, if any, educational

methodologies and approaches are “reasonably calculated” to promote meaningful educational progress
for Student?

44. Did the District engage in impermissible “predetermination” by following district “policy,”
practice and administrative convenience in denying Student an individualized program of services,
offering Student what the District had rather than what was appropriate for Student’s individual needs?
45. Did the District predetermine Student’s placement before it fully and ﬁnally developed an IEP

for Student?
46. Did the District fail to provide a copy of the IEP to Student’s parents at the end of the IEP

meeting?

47. Did the District fail to advise parents of their entitlement to have a parent member participate in
the IEP meeting?

48. Did Student's parents not waive their right and requirement to have a parent member participate
in the IEP meeting?

49. In the event the District produces a parent waiver form at hearing, did Student’s parents

waive their right to a parent member under duress?

50. Does the proposed IEP program fail to list the projected date of its initiation, including only start
and end dates for “summer” services and thereby failing to give Student’s parents prior written notice of
when the IEP would actually be implemented for the remainder of the 2013—2014 twelve-month school
year?

51. Does the IEP contain an explanation for Student’s disability classiﬁcation of “other health impaired"
and did the PPT fail to consider traumatic brain injury as a possible appropriate classiﬁcation, despite
Student’s medical history?

52. Does the District’s proposed IEP document, as written, fail to provide Student with a

Free Appropriate Public Education?

53. Did the parents cooperate in the IEP development process?

54. Did the District fail to conduct appropriate evaluations and/or assessments of Student?

December 26, 2013 Final Decision and Order 14-0189

55. Did the IEP fail to include any goals for Student’s use and acquisition of skills with the assistive
technology device he requires?

56. Did the IEP fail to identify the assistive technology device that Student uses?

57. Did the District fail to develop IEP goals and objectives that were clear, unambiguous, adequate
and sufficiently challenging and individualized for Student?

58. Do the IEP goals fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s deﬁcits in language,
thinking and problem solving skills?

59. Do the IEP goals fail to adequately and appropriately address Student’s signiﬁcant deﬁcits in
attention and the impact those deﬁcits have on his learning and retention of material?

60. Did the District fail to develop goals and objectives to adequately promote Student’s need to
develop self—sufﬂciency and independence?

61. Did the District fail to develop goals and objectives individually at the IEP meeting, with the
meaningful participation of Student’s parents?

62. Does the proposed IEP lack goals and objectives to address and remediate interfering behaviors?
63. Did the IEP fail to provide for any parent counseling and training goals?

64. Were the IEP goals for speech and counseling inadequate and inappropriate to meet Student’s
unique and individual needs?
65. Were the IEP goals inappropriate because they failed to include “short term” objectives, and

lacked intermediate points built in the IEP to assess and measure Student’s progress against those goals?
66. Did the IEP fail to mandate social skills services for Student despite reports that Student has
difﬁculty interacting with his peers? Is District’s failure to recommend social skills services for Student
likely to result in regression, and not likely to result in progress in developing his social skills?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

The Board received Parents’ request for a special education due process hearing on September 19, 2013.
The undersigned hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on September 24, 2013. A prehearing conference was
held on October 10, 2013. The original deadline for the mailing of the ﬁnal decision and order was
established as December 3, 2013. During the preheating conference the parties requested an extension 01‘
the mailing deadline for the ﬁnal decision and order so that the parties could panicipate 'Ln mediation.
This request was granted and the new deadline for the mailing of the ﬁnal decision and order was
established as January 2, 2013. The parties engaged in mediation on December 5, 2013, but were not
able to reach a settlement. On December 18, 2013, the ﬁrst hearing date, the matter was dismissed on
the record‘based 0n the hearing ofﬁcer’s receipt of the Parents’ withdrawal of their request for a special
education due process hearing without prejudice on December 17, 2013.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student‘requjling special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬂﬁeen days aﬁer
receipt thereof; the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordanee with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

// 1,:
[9/1/43/‘41‘445/4/2 M.

"1‘ Hearing Ofﬁcer Sigﬁature

341th Ht Fﬂvm

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

t.

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

