July 17, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0551

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. New Haven Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Parent pro se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Michelle Laubin, Esq.
Megan Buxton, Esq,
Berchem, Moses and Devlin, PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

Did the Board provide appropriate programs in the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school years?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on May 20, 2014. The Hearing
Ofﬁcer was appointed on May 21, 2014 and conducted a Prehearing Conference on May 29, 2014. At the
Prehearing Conference, the Board’s attorney raised the issue of sufﬁciency concerning the lack of factual
allegations in the Complaint. The Hearing Ofﬁcer agreed that the Complaint lacked sufﬁcient details to
which the Board could respond. The issue above was identiﬁed generally in anticipation of an amended
complaint. The Parent stated that she was on her way to a Resolution session with the Board and that if
the matter did not settle, she would be retaining counsel. The Hearing Ofﬁcer advised the Parent that if
the matter was not resolved, the Parent’s counsel should ﬁle an appearance and ﬁle an Amended
Complaint (See May 29, 2014 Amended Memorandum t0 Pa1ties). The hearing was scheduled for July
28, 2014. On July 3, 2014, the Board’s attorney reported to the Hearing Ofﬁcer that the parties did not
reach an agreement at the Resolution session held without counsel and that no Parent counsel had
contacted her. She also had not received an Amended Complaint as ordered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer in the
Memorandum t0 Patties. The Board’s attorney requested an order from the Hearing Ofﬁcer that the Parent
ﬁle an Amended Complaint with sufﬁcient details to which the Board could respond. In response to the
Board’s request, the Hearing Ofﬁcer wrote the Parent and ordered the Parent to have counsel contact the
Board’s attorney and for either the attorney or the Parent, ifum‘epresented, to ﬁle an Amended Complaint
by July 1 l, 2014. If neither the Parent nor her attorney responded by July 15, 2014, the Hearing Ofﬁcer
would dismiss the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request. The Board was ordered to ﬁle a Motion to
Dismiss on the issue of sufﬁciency. The Parent did not comply with this Order. The Complaint was not
amended. The Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss with accompanying memorandum of law on July 14,
2014. The Board’s Motion to Dismiss is GRANTED. The Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request does
not meet the requirements of 34 CFR §508(b)(5),

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing officer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Mw/m

 

Heariné/Ofﬁcer Signature
S lvia Ho '
Hearing Officer Name in Print

 

 

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

i
.
t
|
i
.
.

