October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. West Hartford Board of Education

Appearing on Behalf of the Student: Attorney Courtney Spencer

The Law Ofﬁce of Courtney Spencer
100 Riverview Center, Suite 290
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing on Behalf of the Board: Attorney Susan Freedman

Attorney Peter Maher
Shipman & Goodwin
One Constitution Plaza
Haltford, CT 06103

Appearing before: , Attorney Brette H. Fitton

Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1.

10.

11.

Did the District fail to provide Student with a Free Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”)
from March 24, 2012 through the remainder of the 2011-2012 academic year?

Did the District fail to provide Student with a FAPE for Extended School Year (“ESY”)
services for the summer of 2012?

Did the District fail to provide Student with a FAPE for the 2012-2013 academic year?

Did the District fail to provide Student with a FAPE for (“ESY”) services for the summer of
2013?

Did the District fail to provide Student with a FAPE for the 2013-2014 academic year?

Is the District’s proposed program for 2014 ESY appropriate?

If the District’s proposed program for 2014 ESY is not appropriate, what is the appropriate
program?

Is the District’s proposed program for the 2014-2015 school year appropriate?

If the District’s proposed program for the 2014-2015 school year is not appropriate, what is
the appropriate program?

Did the District commit procedural Violations of the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act (“IDEA”) including, but not limited to:

a. failing to identify Student in a timely manner;

b. failing to provide consistent programming when Student is unable to attend school;

c. failing to provide appropriate evaluations;

d. failing to implement recommendations of a Parent’s neuropsychologist; and/or

e. failing to provide appropriate transition planning?

If the District did commit a procedural Violation of the IDEA, did such procedural Violation
result in a denial of a FAPE to the Student?

 

October 2, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14—0440

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The hearing was requested on March 24, 2014, and the original deadline for mailing the ﬁnal
decision and order was June 7, 2014. During the prehearing conference held on April 3, 2014, the
Attorney for the Student requested an extension of time to allow the parties to participate in
mediation and to accommodate hearing dates. There was no objection to this request from the
Attorney for the Board. The extension request was granted and the new deadline for the mailing of
the ﬁnal decision and order was established as July 7, 2014. Requests for extension were granted in
30 day increments to allow for the scheduling of additional hearing dates. The ﬁnal deadline for the
mailing of the F inal Decision and Order was set at October 5, 2014. The hearing convened on June
9, 2014, June 17, 2014, July 7, 2014, July 16, 2014, August 20, 2014, August 21, 2014 and August
26, 2014.

The Parents’ witnesses were Mother, Scott Wells (“Options Director”) and John Thomas (“Private
LCSW”). The Board’s witnesses were Neil Cummings (“Transition Coordinator”), Michael Davis
(“STRIVE Program Coordinator”), J amie Urso (“STRIV E Teacher”) Ted Dillon (“Special
Education Supervisor”) and Beth Pettinelli (“ACHIEVE Teacher”).

The Parents’ Request for a Special Education Due Process Hearing was entered into evidence as
Hearing Ofﬁcer-Exhibit 1. Parents submitted exhibits P-l through P-46. Board submitted exhibits
B-l through B-63. All exhibits were entered as full exhibits. All motions and obj ections not
previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled. T0 the extent that the procedural history,
summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be so considered,
and vice versa. For reference, see SAS Institute Inc. V. H. Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816
(MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F. v. Calallen Independent School District, 835 F .Supp. 340, 20
IDELR 736 (SD. Tex. 1993).

SUMMARY:

An 18 year old Student with diagnoses of Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder, High
Functioning Autistic Spectrum Disorder, a Processing Disorder and Psychotic Disorder refused to
participate in the regular education program in one of District’s high schools in which he was
enrolled. In response, District provided homebound tutoring and then an alternative high school
program to Student. Parents ﬁled a Request for Special Education Due Process hearing claiming the
programs provided by the Board denied Student a Free Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”).
Parents also alleged various procedural Violations of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(“IDEA”) and claimed that the District’s proposed programs for 2014 Extended School Year
(“ESY”) and the 2014—2015 academic year were inappropriate.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10-
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(1) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-176e t0 4-178,
inclusive, §§4-18la and 4-186.

October 2, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14—0440

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the folIowing facts:

1.

Student is an 18 year old male enrolled in the West Haitford Public Schools. He is eligible
for Special Education under the IDEA under the eligibility category of Emotional
Disturbance. (Testimony of Mother; B-52)

A neuropsychological evaluation of Student completed on July 13, 2012 revealed diagnoses
of High Functioning Autistic Spectrum Disorder/Asperger’s Syndrome, a Processing
Disorder—Predominately Nonverbal LD and Executive Subtype and Psychotic Disorder-Not
Otherwise Speciﬁed. (B-10) This evaluation was arranged and paid for by Parents.
(Testimony of Mother)

Student’s intellectual ability was tested during the July 2012 neuropsychological evaluation
through administration of the Weschler Adult Inte1ligence Sca1e-IV Edition. (B—lO) While
Student’s Full Scale 1Q was 108, placing him in the upper limits of the average range, the
disparity or “scatter” between individual scores was deemed to reduce the utility of the Full
Scale IQ score when understanding the needs of Student. (1d.) Student’s composite scores in
Verbal Comprehension placed him in the 98th percentile. (1d,) Perceptual Reasoning subtest
scores glaced Student in the average range, but with percentile ranks ranging from the 25m to
the 63r percentiles. (Id.) Student scored in the superior range on the arithmetic subtest, and
in the average range for the digit span subtest for working memory. Processing speed
subtest scores ranged from the low average or 16th percentile for coding through the average
range for symbol search (37th percentile). (Id.)

The 2012 neuropsycholo gica1 evaluation included administration of the Wide Range
Achievement Test 111. (B-10) The achievement testing results placed Student in the superior
range for Reading and Spelling and in the average range for Numerical Operations. (1d,) The
Student received an overall Spontaneous Writing Quotient standard score of 108 on the Test
of Written Language-IV administered at this time indicating Student has average writing
skills. (Id.) Student’s know1edge and application of writing conventions was in the high
average range. (B-10)

Student’s performance on the NEPSY-II tests of affect recognition, theory of mind and face
memory revealed weaknesses in the areas of social cognition, communication, and
motivation. (B-IO) Other weaknesses included learning information embedded within a
social context, executive processing and visual motor integration skills. (B-10)

The clinical interview conducted by the neuropsycho1ogist showed Student’s thinking to be
characterized by irrational beliefs, paranoid patterns of thinking and difﬁculty distinguishing
reality from fantasy. (B—10) Aggressive and morbid themes were prevalent in Student’s
thinking. (1d.)

During the 2011—2012 academic year Student was enrolled in 10‘h grade in Hall High School
in West Hartford. (Testimony of Mother)

October 2, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14-0440

8.

10.

ll.

l2.

l3.

Historically, Student’s interactions with peers had been awkward. (Testimony of Mother)
After entering high school, Student’s social interactions with peers were of a greater concern
for Mother. (Id.) In September of his 10‘h grade year, Student became involved with peers
who encouraged him to participate in a “ﬁght club” during school in an effort to integrate
socially. (Id.) Student’s participation resulted in a call to Mother by Hall High School
administration, but no formal disciplinary action was taken against Student for this ﬁght.
(Id.) '

Following the “ﬁght club” incident, Student’s family engaged in family therapy for about 6
weeks, but Student would not participate and so this therapeutic intervention was ended in
October, 2011. (Testimony of Mother)

In December 2011, Parents discovered that Student, who had previously achieved high
marks in school, now had Ds in all of his classes. (Testimony of Mother) When confronted
by Mother about the grades, Student made statements of suicidal ideation. (Id.) In response
to these statements, the Student’s pediatrician was called and on his recommendation,
Student was taken to Connecticut Children’s Medical Center (“CCMC”). Student had a
pocketknife on him when he arrived at CCMC, which was conﬁscated from him. Upon
learning that it would not be returned to him, Student’s reaction resulted in a referral to the
Institute of Living (“IOL”). (Id.) Student remained at IOL overnight for observation and was
discharged the next day. (Testimony of Mother, P—30)

Mother notiﬁed the school that Student had expressed suicidal ideation, been hospitalized
and had been bringing a pocketknife to school with him. (Testimony of Mother) On
December 8, 2011, the School convened a meeting of the Child Study Action Team to
discuss these recent events. (Testimony of Mother; P-31) As of the date of this meeting,
Student was failing ﬁve out of seven classes. (P-3 l). Interventions discussed included
reducing Student’s workload and assistance with organizational skills. (Id.) Mother provided
the school team with a discharge summary clearing Student for return to school and
indicated that Student would be following up with a psychologist. (Testimony of Mother)

Student began to see a private Licensed Clinical Social Worker (“Private LCSW”) in 2011,
initially on a weekly basis and currently on a bi—weekly basis. (Testimony of Private LCSW)
In the course of his therapy with this Private LCSW, Student has discussed a desire to kill
his former psychiatrist on several occasions. (Id.) In addition to these homicidal thoughts,
Student has also mentioned attacking people at school and blowing up a hospital. (Id.) The
Private LCSW, on occasion, has noted a decline in Student’s behavior, which he has
attributed to missing medication or a drop in medication levels. (Id.) When this happens he
refers the Student back to his current psychiatrist to do an acute psychiatric assessment to
determine if there is an imminent risk. (Id.)

Student’s Private LCSW focuses his treatment on reality testing, building relationships,
learning to channel and moderate his feelings in rage, talking about feelings in order to
identify them, improving his mood affect and eliminating suicidal ideation. (Testimony of
Private LCSW) The Private LCSW also focuses on monitoring Student’s aggression and
dangerous and psychotic thought processes. (Id.) The Private LCSW testiﬁed credibly that

 

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0440

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

without constant clinical intervention, supervision and monitoring Student has a “. . .high
risk to hurt somebody, kill somebody, damage somebody”. (Id.)

On J anuaiy 31, 2012, a meeting was held by the District to review evaluation data and
determine whether Student was eligible for 504 accommodations (B—2). At this meeting
Student was determined eligible for accommodations based on his recent diagnosis of
Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder by a doctor on J anuary 13, 2012 and the decline in
Student’s grades. (Id) Accommodations for Student resulting from this meeting included
modiﬁcations of his grading system and elimination of penalties for late assignments,
consideration for Student absences, and the assignment of a counseling intern to assist
Student with organization for the balance of the school year. (Id.)

Student’s attendance became sporadic in January 2012. (Testimony of Mother) Student
would refuse to go to school as a result ofpanic attacks and episodes of paranoid thinking.
(Id.) Attendance continued to be an issue in February; Student eventually stopped attending
at all in that month. (ld.) Homebound tutoring was arranged for Student after the School
consulted with Student’s psychiatrist. (Testimony of Mother; 13-16)

Parents referred Student for Special Education in March 2012. (Testimony of Mother)

On March 12, 2012, during the second half of Student’s 10‘h grade year, a PPT meeting was
held to review Parent’s referral and to determine Student’s eligibility for Special Education.
(B-3) The PPT noted Student had achieved “acceptable” grades in the ﬁrst semester, but in
the second semester was failing all subjects and as a result was now receiving homebound
instruction. (Id.) The PPT did not determine that the student was eligible at this time, stating
in the IEP summary that the difﬁculties being experienced by Student have not been over a
long time. (Id.) The PPT was set to reconvene in two weeks to check on Student’s progress.
(Id)

Student sat for the Connecticut Academic Performance Test (“CAPT”) in March 2012, but
Student did not complete the test, thus his scores were reported as blank. (B—39)

On April 23, 2012, the PPT reconvened in order to review the referral and plan an
evaluation. (13—4) The Student was not present at the PPT meeting because he had been
hospitalized at St. Francis due to emotional concerns. (Id.) Parents reported that Student had
been having aggressive thoughts which had caused his psychologist to call the West
Hartford police. (Id) Parents reported that doctors had indicated Student has PDD. (Id.)

As part of the evaluation recommended by the PPT, the parents and teachers were to
complete behavioral checklists, a psychiatric consult was to be conducted by District
psychiatrist Dr. Black, and Student was to meet with Hall school psychologist if Student is
emotionally comfoﬁable. (B-4) The PPT also recommended an increase in Student’s current
homebound tutoring to 8 hours per week. (Id.) The PPT was set to reconvene when the
evaluations were complete. Gd.)

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

The PPT noted that Student’s psychiatrist would not release the evaluation he had completed
to the school. (B-4) As of the April 23, 2012 meeting, Parents indicated that they would not
sign release forms until they had a better understanding of what was going on with the
Student. (Id.) The PPT did not recommend cognitive testing after determining that
academics were not a concern for the Student. (1d,)

A psychological evaluation was conducted on May 9, 2012 by the Hall High School~
School Psychologist that involved the administration of the Behavior Assessment System for
Children 2nd Edition (“BASC-H”). (B-S) Teacher Rating Scale Reports resulted in a rating of
At—Risk in areas of Attention Problems, Study Skills and Functional communication and a
rating of average in all other areas. (Id.) Student’s Self-Report Scale placed him in the At-
Risk range for hyperactivity, attitudes toward school and teachers. His self-report about
personal adjustment was in the clinically signiﬁcant range relating to a feeling that he has a
poor relationship with his parents. (1d,) Parents’ reports placed Student in the clinically
signiﬁcant range for hyperactivity, aggression, anxiety, depression, and activities of daily
living. (101.) Both Parents rated Student at risk for conduct problems and functional
communication. The recommendations of the School Psychologist were for the PPT to
explore the possibility of special education eligibility under the category of Emotional
Disturbance and to reconvene to discuss an appropriate program for Student. (Id.)

The psychiatric consultation was conducted on May 9, 2012 by Dr. Black, the District
psychiatrist. (B-6) Dr. Black’s report indicated that Student might have Asperger’s and
Reactive Attachment Disorder. (Id.)

The PPT reconvened on May 17, 2012 to review the referral with the stated puipose of
reviewin g recommendations from the psychiatric consult and determining the correct
placement for the remainder of the 2012 school year. (B—7) The PPT recommended that
Student’s current homebound tutoring hours be increased to 8 hours a week and that the PPT
reconvene on June 11, 2012 to determine eligibility. (Id.)

The PPT reconvened on June 11, 2012 and at this time identiﬁed Student as eligib1e for
Special Education under the disability category of Emotional Disturbance. (B-8)

The District normally provides 10 hours a week of for students who are out of school.
(Testimony of Special Education Supervisor) Student did not receive 10 hours but rather
received an inconsistent amount of hours per week due in part to Student’s emotional issues
and also to the schedule of the District tutor. (B-l6)

At the end of the 2011—2012 school year, Student did not have enough hours to earn credits
in his course work. Per Parents’ request, the District extended tutoring into the summer of
2012 to permit Student to complete all his work, which he did. (Testimony of Mother,
Testimony of Special Education Supervisor).

Student received total hours of tutoring mandated under his IEP or enough to get credits he
was missing. (Testimony of Special Education Supervisor)

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

The PPT reconvened on June 19, 2012 in order to review and develop Student’s IEP. (B-9)
The PPT recommended that the Student take the standard administration of the CAPT test
and that the Student be placed at the Success Through Responsibility Initiative Vision
Education program (“STRIVE”) for the 2012-2013 school year. (1d,)

STRIVE is an alternative high school program offered by the West Hartford Public Schools
(“WHPS”) that includes academic courses necessary for students to meet WHPS graduation
requirements. (B-31) There are no non-disabled peers at STRIVE. (Testimony of Special
Education Supervisor). STRIVE’S curriculum is aligned with that of the regular education
West Hartford high schools in terms of content. (Testimony of STRIVE Teacher)
Modiﬁcations are made to how learning in a content area may be expressed. (1d,)

STRIVE employs a behavior management system which is data driven and employs a level
system, whereby students earn privileges by earning points for appropriate behavior.
(Testimony of STRIVE Program Coordinator; B~31, B—3 5) By all accounts Student’s
behavior while in the STRIVE program was very good. (Testimony of Mother, Testimony of
STRIVE Program Coordinator) With few exceptions Student’s behavior was above 80%
compliance while in the STRIVE program. (B-35) Student’s behavior was so good that there
was discussion in the STRIVE program about taking Student off the behavior plan.
(Testimony of STRIVE Teacher)

The STRIVE program’s policies are described in the STRIVE Student Handbook, which
Student signed on August 29, 2012. (B-32)

The STRIVE social worker and Student’s Private LCSW communicated about Student every
few months. (Testimony of Private LCSW) Other than these conversations the District did
not have any other communications with the Private LCSW. (ld.)

Mother requested that STRIVE Social Worker not delve into ceitain subj ects that Mother
felt would trigger student. (Testimony of STRIVE Social Worker)

The IEP resulting from the June 19, 2012 PPT meeting was inaccurate, in that it indicated
that Student would be spending 14.25 hours per week with non—disabled peers, when in fact
due to the nature of the STRIVE program, all palticipating students have some form of
disability. (Testimony of Special Education Supervisor; B-9) The IEP also fails to note the
evaluation procedure, assessments, records or reports used as a basis for the actions
proposed. (B—9)

The IEP from the June 19, 2012 PPT meeting indicates that the PPT determined that
Extended School Year Services were not required for the summer of 2012. (B-9)

There was a behavior incident report for the use of inappropriate language at STRIVE on
March 11, 2013, which was addressed through processing with staff. (B-36)

Student again sat for the CAPT in March of 2013. (B-39) Student this time completed the
test and scored at the proﬁcient level in Mathematics and Reading Across the Disciplines,

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

and at Goal in Science and Writing Across the Disciplines. (B—39) Student was given the
accommodations of extra time and a separate setting as set forth in his IEP. (Testimony of
Special Education Supervisor)

On December 13, 2013, Student received an out of school suspension for an incident on that
day during which Student reacted to another Student “mushing” a female Student in the face
by physically assaulting him. (B-37, P-35) In accord with STRIVE policy Student was
arrested. (Id.) Student was permitted to return to school on December 19, 2013. (1d,)

Student’s grades at the end of the 2012-2013 school year (Student’s 11tll grade year) at
STRIVE were As and Bs. (B—19)

Student was taught in the STRIVE program by a teacher certiﬁed in both regular education
and special education, with experience in teaching students on the Autism spectrum.
(Testimony of STRIVE Teacher) The STRIVE Teacher noted signiﬁcant growth in
Student’s social skills during his time in the STRIVE program. (Id.) Student’s private
LCSW believed that STRIVE was an appropriate program for Student. (Testimony of
Private LCSW)

Student participated in the year long Career Academic Vocation Education Class at the
STRIVE program during the 2012—2013 school year. (Testimony of Transition Coordinator;
B-15)

On September 20, 2012, a PPT meeting was held. (B-12) During this meeting, the PPT
reviewed Student’s progress at the STRIVE program and reviewed the neuropsychological
evaluation parents had obtained over the summer. The PPT agreed with the
neuropsychological evaluation (Testimony of Special Education Supervisor; 13—10). The IEP
was revised to include participation in the CAPT with accommodations. (B-12)

On April 29, 2013, Mother contacted Student’s assigned guidance counselor at Ha11 High
School to inquire about college prep counseling. (B-44) In response, Student’s guidance
counselor indicated Student should be taking the SAT twice, in June and again in
September, and that the sign—up for the June SAT was on May 7, 2013. (Id.)

Student met with the Hall guidance counselor on May 8, 2013 and during this meeting he
indicated an interest in attending college. (B-44)

On May 22, 2013, a PPT meeting was held for Student’s annual review. (13-13) At the time
of the annual review in 2013, Student had a 3.0 grade point average and his attendance had
signiﬁcantly improved. (Id.) Based on Student’s success in the STRIVE program during the
2012-2013 school year, the PPT recommended that Student begin reintegration into Hall
High School. (Id.) This was to be accomplished by splitting the day between Hall High
School and the STRIVE program, with Student taking academic classes at Hall High School
in the morning and then ﬁnishing the day at STRIVE. (Id.)

October 2, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14—0440

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

At the May 22, 2013 PPT meeting, the PPT determined that Student did not require an
Extended School Year program for the summer of 2013. (B—13).

On August 22, 2013, Mother expressed her concern to the H2111 Guidance Counselor
regarding Student having a Study Hall during his mornings at Hall High School during the
2013-2014 school year. (B-44) In response, the Hall Guidance Counselor suggested
alternative courses. (Id.) Mom indicated that Student was not interested in the alternatives
offered. She also expressed that Student was very excited to go back to school that day. (B-
44)

On September 19, 2013, the STRIVE Social Worker and the Hall High School Guidance
Counselor exchanged emails regarding Mother’s agreement to Student not taking the SATs
in September. (B-44)

Student had extreme difﬁculty readjusting to the Hall High School environment and began
to skip classes. (B—14) On October 22, 2013, a Hall High School Guidance Counselor met
with Student to discuss his missed classes and Student became extremely upset and
threatened to leave school. (B—14) STRIVE staff were successful in getting Student to walk
to the STRIVE building and de-escalate Student’s behavior. (Id.)

On October 28, 2013, a PPT meeting was held to review and revise the IEP and discuss
transition planning. (B—14) As a result of this meeting, Student was reem'olled in the
STRIVE program full time until either the end of the 2013—2014 school year or when
Student and the PPT decided Student should graduate. (B-14, B-33) At this time, the PPT
was set to reconvene on J anuary 10, 2014. (B-14)

On February 4, 2014, a PPT meeting was held with the stated purpose of reviewing and
revising the IEP and transition planning. (B-15) Teacher reports indicated Student was
achieving average to above average grades. The STRIVE Social Worker reported progress
in the area of identifying emotions and feelings and accessing school counseling, and that
Student was an excellent participant in group problem solving. (Id.) For the balance of the
2013-2014 school year, the District proposed a split program with Student’s day beginning
at STRIVE with group therapy and academic classes in the morning and with vocational
training in the afternoon supervised by a one to one job coach. (Id.) Vocational assessments
and counseling were also proposed. (Id.) Parents requested an out of district placement. (Id.)

Student participated in the Hall High School Wrestling Team while enrolled in the STRIVE
program. (B-18) Student palticipation in wrestling was facilitated by his parents who drove
him to matches. (Testimony of Mother) Student’s private LSCW encouraged wrestling as an
outlet to channel Student’s severe aggression, but found his therapeutic intervention was
necessary to keep him involved in the sport. (Testimony of Private LCSW)

Parents were granted a conservatorship over Student by State of Connecticut Court of
Probate, West Hartford Probate District on April 23, 2014. (Testimony of Mother, P-18)

Student was hospitalized again on May 19, 2014 and discharged on May 28, 2014. (B-45)

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0440

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

There was no testimony or documentation to indicate that any incidents resulting in
Student’s hospitalizations occurred during the school day.

Student graduated from the STRIVE program in June of 2014 and the class went to an
amusement park to celebrate. (Testimony of Mother, Testimony of STRIVE Program
Director)

On June 2, 2014, a PPT meeting was held to conduct Student’s annual review and undertake
transition planning. (B-52) At this meeting the PPT recommended that Student be placed
full-time in the ACHIEVE post—secondary program run by West Hartford Public Schools.
(Id.) The PPT also recommended Student’s program inc1ude counseling once a week and a 1
to 1 job coach (Id.) An ESY program was also proposed for the summer of 2014 that
involved work experiences with a one to one job coach from 8:30 am. to 12:30 pm. 4-5
days a week. (Id.) Transponation was to be provided although the speciﬁc nature of the
transportation was not identiﬁed, nor is it clear whether transportation is to be provided only
to and from the program or also within the program day. (Id.)

At the June 2, 2014 meeting, Parents rejected the IEP proposed by the Board for Student’s
ESY 2014 and for Student’s post—secondary 2014-2015 school year, requesting instead that
Student be placed at an out of district program. (B-52) The out of district program request
was refused by the PPT, on the basis that it believed the District could provide an
appropriate program in district. (B—52)

The ACHIEVE program includes three to four days of vocational experiences, one day of
independent living skills training and one day of community—based experiences per week.
(Testimony of ACHIEVE Teacher; B-44) The ACHIEVE program also offers the
oppmtunity to take courses at community college. (Id.) Students are instructed on how to
utilize public transportation and take the public bus as part of their life skills training. (Id.)
Social skills needs are addressed through group and individual counseling. (Id.) Vocational
training begins with full staff support which is faded as appropriate. (Id.)

The school—based portion of the ACHIEVE program is located in the same building as the
STRIVE Building that Student attended for the 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 school years.
(Testimony of Mother, Testimony of ACHIEVE Teacher).

The ACHIEVE program has an established process for incoming Students that inc1udes a
program orientation for new incoming students in May. (Testimony of ACHIEVE Teacher 1;
B-46, B-47, B-48) This process was not followed for Student. Student did not attend this
orientation. (Testimony of Mother)

Progress at ACHIEVE is tracked through individualized Community Based Situational
Assessments and Skills Assessment (B-SO, B—Sl).

Mother visited the ACHIEVE program on the date of the June 2, 2014 PPT and met brieﬂy
with ACHIEVE Teacher. (Testimony of Mother)

10

October 2, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 14—0440

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

Mother was aware in advance that ACHIEVE was one of the options that the PPT would be
considering on June 2, 2014 and had had conversations about ACHIEVE with Lori
Fitzsimmons and Neil Cummings in the Fall of 2013. (Testimony of Mother) Mother
received four pages describing the program. (Testimony of Mother, B-46)

Student was hospitalized again in June 2014 after an incident in his home When he took a
knife out of his kitchen and ran out of his house. (Testimony of Mother)

On the date of Student’s graduation from the STRIVE program, Mother and Student looked
into the ACHIEVE classroom and spoke brieﬂy with a paraprofessional associated with the
ACHIEVE Program. (Testimony of Mother) No further meetings with ACHIEVE staff took
place. (Testimony of Mother)

Writing is a weakness for Student. (Testimony of Special Education Supervisor, Testimony
of STRIVE Teacher; B—lO) Student’s visual motor integration skills are low which impacts
Student’s abi1ity to handwrite. (Testimony of Special Education Supervisor) Elaboration was
the main challenge for Student. (Testimony of STRIVE Teacher)

Student needs staff that are able to develop and engage with him in an empathic relationship
and who have an understanding of psychology, emotional and psychiatric processes, and
who have the ability to be calm and soothing and listen carefully. (Testimony of Private
LCSW)

Student is at risk of being triggered for rage and violent fantasies if interventions are
inappropriate1y handled. (Testimony of Private LCSW)

While the Private LCSW reported Student had an extremely low tolerance for group
counseling, the STRIVE staff responsible for group counseling did not observe this to be the
case. (Testimony of Private LCSW, Testimony of STRIVE Social Worker) Student showed
growth in his ability to accept peer feedback and changing his behavior in response to peer
criticism. (Testimony of STRIVE Social Worker).

Parents have requested placement at the Options Program in Hartford. (Testimony of
Mother) The Options agency is a private Special Education program approved by the State
of Connecticut. (Testimony of Options Director) In Options, social skills are addressed by
developing a plan that allows staff to take students into the community and sociaiize them in
different settings with other competitively employed people or people attending college.
(Id.) Options can provide staff members to work one-on—one with a student to help them
integrate into employment or college settings. (Id.) Academic needs are addressed through
one-on—one settings in Options and classrooms with multiple students are not utilized. (1d.)

Students are paid for their vocational work in Options and ACHIEVE. (Testimony of
Options Director, Testimony of ACHIEVE Teacher)

11

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0440

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

When determining job placements for Students, Options will place students in established
job sites to assess a student’s aptitude for basic employment (“soft”) skills such as showing
up on time, and then as the staff get to know the Student job development is individualized.
(Testimony of Options Director).

Similarly, the ACHIEVE teacher testiﬁed that she Will have students participate in an initial
job placement while she gets to know and learns more about the Student. (Testimony of
Achieve Teacher)

Twenty percent of students at Options attend post-secondary education. (Testimony of
Options Director) When introducing a student to the college environment, Options has
provided one—on-one support and then faded support when appropriate. (1d,) Options has
also supported students with college coursework through tutoring. (Id.)

Transportation in the Options program is in the program’s own vehicles. (Testimony of
Director of Options)

ACHIEVE provides Students with bus training as a life skill. (Testimony of ACHIEVE
teacher.)

Options vocational counselors are hired more for their personal character traits than for a
speciﬁc educational background. (Testimony of Options Director) Some vocational
counselors have only a high school diploma. (Id.)

Options does not employ group counseling, rather the therapeutic component of the Options
program is provided by two LCSWS and a fulltime certiﬁed school counselor/guidance
counselor. (Testimony of Options Director)

Students in Options have taken classes at Capital Community College, but Options has not
worked with Tunxis Community College. (Testimony of Options Director) The ACHIEVE
program also provides access to college courses at local community colleges. (Testimony of
ACHIEVE teacher)

Student had employment with a pet store that was facilitated by District Staff. (Testimony of
Transition Coordinator) Student was ﬁred from this job based on the owner’s observation of
an interaction Student had with his own dog when Mother brought the dog into the store and
it interacted with the owner’s dog. (Id.) Student’s direct supervisor at this job had a positive
assessment of Student’s work. Gd.) Student was also employed by a local man in the
community doing his lawn work. Gd.) Student received positive feedback on his
performance in this job, although initiating tasks was an area that needed improvement
according to the employer. (1d,) ‘

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

DENIAL OF A FAPE CLAIMS

12

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0440

The IDEA requires states receiving federal special education funding to provide disabled children
with a FAPE. M. W. ex rel. S. W. v. N.Y.C Dep't ofEduc., 725 F.3d 131, 135 (2d Cir. 2013); RE, v,
N. Y. C. Dep’z‘ 0fEduc., 694 F.3d 167, 174-75 (2d Cir. 2012). "To ensure that qualifying children
receive a FAPE, a school district must create an individualized education program ('lEP') for each
such child." RE, 694 F.3d at 175; see also 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d). That IEP must be developed in
accordance with the procedures laid out in the IDEA, and must be "reasonably calculated to enable
the child to receive educational beneﬁts." Ed. ofEduc. v. Rowley, 458 US. 176, 207 (1982). The
state must also ensure that "[t]o the maximum extent appropriate, children with disabilities are
educated with children who are not disabled." 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(5)(A).

A. FAPE FOR THE 2011-2012 YEAR

While Student’s difﬁculties began to manifest themselves earlier in the year, the Statute of
Limitations limits the scope of the claim to the two year period preceding the ﬁling of the
complaint. R.C.S.A. 10-76h—(4—a) In the present case, Student ﬁled for Due Process on March 23,
2014, thus, analysis of the claim that Student Was denied a FAPE for the 201 1-2012 school year will
focus on that portion of the school year running from March 24, 2011 to the end of the year. The
District provided Student with a FAPE from March 24, 2012 through the remainder of the 2011-
2012 academic year. Student began a pattern of school refusal in January 2012, eventually ceasing
to attend school at all in February 2012. In order to maintain Student’s academic progress, the
District an‘anged for home—bound tutoring for Student. This homebound tutoring was in place while
the District processed Parents’ referral to Special Education and determined Student’s eligibility.
While the tutoring schedule was inconsistent and that inconsistency required compensatory tutoring
hours beyond the regular school year, Student was eventually able to complete his coursework. 1n
the face of Student’s complete disengagement from the regular education environment, the
District’s provision of homebound tutoring was reasonably calculated to provide the Student with
an educational beneﬁt and which did enable Student to obtain the credits necessary to complete 10‘11
grade.

B. ESY 2012,2013

The District did not fail to provide Student with a FAPE when it determined that Student did not
require ESY programming during the summer of 2012 and the summer of 2013. The District has an
obligation to provide ESY programming to students receiving Special Education under the IDEA
when such programming is necessary to provide a FAPE. 34 CFR 300,106 (a) (1). When
determining whether or not a student shall receive ESY, the Connecticut Department of Education
has indicated that the analysis includes both a "regression/recoupment criteria" and "nonregi'ession
criteria". The factors to consider in this analysis include:(a) The nature or severity of the student‘s
disability; (b) [Whether] the student is likely to lose critical skills or fail to recover these skills
within a reasonable time as compared to typical students; (0) The student's progress in the areas of
learning crucial to attaining self—sufﬁciency and independence from caretakers); (d) [Whether] the
student’s stereotypic, ritualistic, aggressive or self—injurious interfering behaviors prevent the
student from receiving some educational beneﬁt from the program during the school year; or (e)
Other special circumstances identiﬁed by the IEP team such as: the ability of the student to interact
with other non—disabled students; the areas of the student's curriculum that need continuous
attention; the student's vocational needs; or the availability of alternative resources. (Topic Brief,
Connecticut State Department of Education, March 15, 2007)

13

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

In the summer of 2012, Student’s eligibility under the category of Emotional Disturbance had just
been determined and Student was receiving homebound tutoring to ensure he received the credits
necessary to complete his 10‘h grade coursework. At the time of the 2012 PPT meeting when ESY
was deemed unnecessary, there was no indication that the tutoring being provided was not assisting
Student to ﬁnish his coursework for the year. Historically, academic achievement had not been a
problem for the Student, as he had achieved good grades in the years leading up to his sophomore
year. While Student’s mental health issues had impacted Student’s educational progress, with
tutoring in place and on track to bring Student current in his studies, and Student receiving care
from his Psychiatrist and Private LCSW, it was reasonable for the PPT to conclude that regression
and recoupment were not concerns and that none of the “nonregression” criteria applied.

Going into the summer of 2013, the PPT reviewed Student’s progress in the STRIVE program and
determined it was appropriate to try to reintegrate Student into the Hall High School in the 2013-
2014 school year. In light of Student’s past academic success and Student’s demonstrated ability to
achieve academically and make progress in social skills within STRIVE’S smaller program, it was
reasonable for the PPT to conclude that Student was not at risk for regression and did not meet any
of the “non—regression criteria” which would require remediation through ESY for the summer of
2013.

C. 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 STRIVE PROGRAM

The District did not fail to provide Student with a FAPE for the 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 school
years. The STRIVE program, in which Student was enrolled for his junior year and for the majority
of the senior year, provided Student with an environment that, through reduced class size and
therapeutic and behavioral supports, resulted in Student being able to transition from total school
refusal to a reengagement in a school environment with peers. While the attempt to reintegrate
Student into the regular high school environment was unsuccessful, the failed attempt in and of
itself does not amount to a deprivation of a FAPE.

D. PROPOSED PROGRAM FOR ESY 2014 and 2014—2015

The post-secondary education programs proposed by the Parties are strikingly similar. One critical
difference is in the area of transportation, where Parents’ proposed program has support staff
driving students in private transportation vehicles owned by the program, while the District’s
program relies on school and city bussing. While ACHIEVE is an appropriate program for the
Student, District’s transportation services are ilI-deﬁned and, to the extent they contemplate bus-
training student in the beginning of his program at ACHIEVE, are not appropriate. Student’s
speciﬁc needs and challenges require ready access to transpoxtation back to the ACHIEVE program
or other clinical settings should Student show signs of decompensating in his community
placements. To date, Student’s hospitalizations have occurred when he is with family and outside of
the school setting, but the ACHIEVE program represents a signiﬁcant change from the regular
education and STRIVE education environments; until the Student can be stabilized in his post-
secondary program, there must be appropriate transportation for this Student that takes into account
his potential for intense psychological and emotional distress. While the substantive nature of the
Program proposed by the District for 2014 ESY was reasonably calculated to confer an educational
beneﬁt in the nature of transitional services, the program suffers from the same deﬁciency in the
appropriateness of transportation as a related sewice. The ESY program proposed involved work
experiences with a one to one job coach from 8:30 am. to 12:30 pm. 4-5 days a week. This
program would have allowed Student to gain work experience and job skills over the summer and

14

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

would have also given ACHIEVE staff additional information when programming for the Student
for the 2014—201 5 school year; however, the transportation services to be provided are not
sufﬁciently described.

2. PROCEDURAL VIOLATIONS
34 CFR § 300.513(a) (2) requires a ﬁnding that the procedural inadequacies have impeded the
child’s right to a FAPE, signiﬁcantly impeded the parent’s opportunity to participate in the
decision—making process regarding the provision of a FAPE t0 the parent’s child, or caused a
deprivation of educational beneﬁt in order to support a denial of a FAPE.

A. Consistent Programming
The Board’s records regarding tutoring received by Student during the Spring semester of 2012 are
of limited assistance. The type and amount of information contained in the records tendered by the
Board is not consistent between entries. The records demonstrate, and the District does not dispute,
that tutoring sessions were inconsistent in terms of duration of sessions and number of sessions per
week. Some of the interruptions were initiated by Parent due to Students emotional status and others
were the result of the tutor’s schedule. Regardless of the source of the inconsistency, Parent has
failed to show that Parents were denied an opportunity to participate in the decision making process,
or that the Student was deprived of an educational beneﬁt.

B. Failure to Provide Appropriate Evaluations
The Board took the appropriate steps in determining whether or not Student was eligible for Special
Education and related services under the disability category of Emotional Disturbance (“ED”) and
did so in a timely manner. In order to be eligible for Special Education under ED, the District had
to ﬁnd that Student was experiencing one of the following conditions:

(A)An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual, sensory, or health factors.

(B) An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and
teachers.

(C) Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal circumstances.

(D) A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression, and/or

(E) A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school
problems.

The PPT has the further obligation to ﬁnd that that Student is exhibiting this condition over a
longperiod affime and to such a degree that Student’s educational performance was negatively
impacted. 34 CFR § 300.8 (c)(4)(i)

In this case, when Student’s difﬁculties were initially brought to the attention of the District, a 504
meeting was convened and accommodations put in place. After Student’s hospitalization, Student’s
difﬁculties were presented to the PPT when Mother referred Student in March 2012. At the time of
the initial referral, Student’s anxiety and school refusal were at a level that was clearly adversely
impacting his educational performance by virtue of the fact that Student was removing himself from
the academic learning environment altogether. While Student’s decline was clearly precipitous and
alarming, the Board had an obligation to ensure that the conditions presented were not temporary in
nature. 34 CFR § 300.8 (c)(4)(i)

15

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0440

After the initial PPT meeting to discuss Parents’ referral on March 12, 2012, the PPT met again on
April 23, 2012 to monitor progress and plan evaluations. The PPT recommended a psychiatric
consult and a psychological evaluation at the April meeting and had these completed by the May 17,
2012 meeting at which the evaluations were discussed. At the May 17, 2012 meeting it was noted
that Parents were meeting with staff from a PHP program to better understand Student’s plan.
Student’s eligibility was not determined at the May 17, 2012 PPT meeting, instead, that
determination was made at the next PPT meeting on June 11, 2014. Student’s eligibility for Special
Education was determined three months after the initial referral for the PPT and only after the PPT
had conducted evaluations and monitored Student over a period of time, as required under both the
Federal and State regulations. The facts do not suppmt a ﬁnding that the procedure which the Board
followed in monitoring Student and subsequently identifying Student resulted in a denial of a F ree
Appropriate Public Education for the Student.

The evaluations conducted by the District of Student were appropriate. The District had an
obligation to conduct a full and individual initial evaluation of Student before the initial provision
of special education and related services to a child with a disability. 34 CFR § 300.301 (a) The
procedural requirements for an initial evaluation are set forth in 34 CFR § 300.301 (0). An initial
evaluation must be conducted within 60 days of receiving parental consent for the evaluation; or
(ii) if the State establishes a timeframe within which the evaluation just be conducted, within that
timeframe; and (2) must consist of procedures ~ (i) to determine if the child is a child with a
disability under § 300.8 ; and (ii) to determine the educational needs of the child.

C. F ailure to implement Recommendations of Parent’s Neuropsychologist

There is no automatic mandate to implement a11 recommendations included in an outside
evaluation. T.S. v. Bd. ofEduc. OfRidgeﬁeld. 87 F.3d 87, 89-90 (2d. Circuit) The
neuropsychological evaluation obtained by Parents was presented at a PPT meeting and considered
by the PPT. Changes were made to the IEP after consideration of the evaluation and other
information presented. The Board did not commit a procedural Violation by not implementing the
recommendations of the neuropsychologist.

D. Failure to provide appropriate transition planning

Transition services means a coordinated set of activities for a child with a disability tha ---

(1) Is designed to be within a results-oriented process, that is focused on improving the
academic and functional achievement of the child with a disability to facilitate the child’s
movement from school to post-schoo1 activities, including postsecondary educations,
vocational education, integrated employment (including supported employment) continuing
and adult education, adult services, independent living or community participation; is based
on the individual child’s needs, taking into account the child’s strengths, preferences, and
interests; and includes — (i) instruction; (ii) related sewices; (iii) community experiences;
(iv) the development of employment and other post school adult living objectives; and (v) if
appropriate, acquisition of daily living skills and provision of a functional vocational
evaluation.

16

 

October 2, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0440

Transition services for children with disabilities may be special education, if provided as specially
designed instruction, or a related sewice, if required to assist a child with a disability to beneﬁt from
special education. 34 CFR § 300.43

Student participated in yearlong vocational classes while in STRIVE which provided opportunities
for Student to assess areas of career interest and the development of employment skills such as
resume drafting. These tasks are by their nature individualized to the Student because they are
designed to identify Student’s potential career interests, the training necessary for those career areas
of interest, and to prepare Student for marketing his particular experience and skill sets to potential
employers. Student was provided with the opportunity to participate in employment and while not
successful in one placement, was successful in the other.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The District did not fail to provide Student with a F ree Appropriate Public Education
(“FAPE”) from March 24, 2012 through the remainder of the 2011-2012 academic year.

2. The District did not fail to provide Student with a FAPE for Extended School Year (“ESY”)
services for the summer of 2012.

3. The District did not fail to provide Student with a FAPE for the 2012-2013 academic year.

4. The District did not fail to provide Student with a FAPE for (“ESY”) services for the
summer of 2013.

5 . The District did not fail to provide Student with a FAPE for the 2013-2014 academic year.

6. The District’s proposed program for 2014 ESY was not appropriate in that transportation as
a related service was not speciﬁed sufﬁciently to take into account Student’s safety in the
community.

7. The District’s proposed program for the 2014-2015 school year was not appropriate and
modiﬁcations to the proposed program should be made only with regards to the ACHIEVE
program’s emphasis on public transportation training. The District shall provide transportation for
the Student to and from the Achieve program and to and from job sites, community outings,
college visits and classes, until such time as the PPT meets and determines that the Student is fully
acclimated to the ACHIEVE program, is ready emotionally to begin bus-training and no longer
needs private transportation. The District shall ensure that transportation is available on an
emergency basis to transport Student should Student need to be removed from the community.

8. The District did not commit the procedural violations of the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (“IDEA”) by failing to identify Student in a timely manner, by failing to provide
appropriate evaluations, or by failing to implement appropriate transition planning.

9. The District did commit the procedural violations of drafting inaccurate, incomplete IEP
documents and failing to provide consistent programming for the Student, however neither of
these violations operated to deny Student an educational beneﬁt or deny Parents a meaningful
opportunity to participate.

17

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student'requiﬁng special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof} the State Board of Education shall také appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the heating ofﬁcer. ‘

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
Genera] Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A). '

/’. . .r ~
/ ”4/ /7/7
rt W’él {?Z/émﬂ

"Hearing Ofﬁcer Sighature

B/mL‘fc H. FHomf
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name 1? Print

t
1
i
1

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 3
. ‘ ?

 

 

