July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Region 14 Board 01" Education

Appearing on behalfof the Parent: Elizabeth Moyse, Esq,
Law Ofﬁce of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Rebecca Santiago, Esq
Anthony Shannon, Esq.
Shipman and Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1, Did the Board provide appropriate programs for the 201 1—2012, 2012—2013 and 2013—
2014 and extended school years?

2. Did the Board’s physical therapy consultant conduct an educational evaluation as
contemplated by the IDEA?

3. Is the Board required to ﬁnancially suppoﬁ an Independent Educational Evaluation for
physical therapy?

4. Is a placement in the ACES program appropriate?

5. Should the Board be required to financially support placement at the ACES program?

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request on November 18, 2013, which was
received by the Board the same day. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on November 19, 2014
and conducted a Prehearing Conference on November 27, 2013 wherein the hearing issues above
were identiﬁed and an initial hearing date was scheduled for January 2, 2014.

The hearing converted on January 2, January 28, Febmai‘y 7, February 12, February 27, March 18,
March 19, March 26, April 21 and May 14, 2014. Prior to the presentation of evidence, the parties
settled their dispute regarding issues number 2 and 3 above, and Parents withdrew these issues from
the hearing. The Parents presented ﬁve witnesses. They were the Mother; Ephraim Bartﬁeld,
M.D,, Student’s Pediatrician; Lori Overland, Private Speech and Language Pathologist; Marcia
Zeigler, STAR Preschool Paraprofessional; and Ashley Mealey, Bethlehem Elementary
Kindergarten Paraprofessional. The Board presented six witnesses. They were Jean “Gigi” Leslie,
STAR Preschool and Bethlehem Elementary School Physical Therapist; Jillian Cook, Bethlehem
Elementary School Speech and Language Pathologist; Kathy Bischoff, STAR Preschool teacher;

1

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

Bonnie Woodward, Kindergarten and First Grade Special Education Teacher; Capital Region
Education Council Physical Therapy Consultant; and Kim Culkin, Director of Special Sewices.

The Board’s exhibits B—1 to B-63 and B-65 to B-74 were admitted as full exhibits. Exhibit B-64
was marked for identiﬁcation purposes only. The Parent exhibits P—3 to P—5; P-7 to P-50; P-52 to P-
71; P—73 to P-77 and P-79 t0 P—80 were admitted as full exhibits. Exhibit P—Sl, 52 and P—78 were
marked for identiﬁcation purposes only. Exhibit P-1 was marked for identiﬁcation purposes and
was replaced by P—49, a complete copy of the document. Exhibit P—2 was marked for identiﬁcation
purposes and was replaced by P-50, a complete copy of the document. The Parent withdrew P-6,
which was a marked copy duplication ot‘B—l 8. The Board objected to the admission of Exhibit P-
72 on the grounds that the Board had never received Exhibit P—72 because there was no copy of it in
the Student’s medical or educational ﬁle. Later, the Board withdrew its objection aﬁer the Director
of Special Services testiﬁed about having reviewed it previously. The Due Process
Complaint/Hearing Request was admitted as H.O.—1 and the parties’ J oint Stipulation 0f Facts were
read into the record and admitted as H.O.-2.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the patties’ requests for extension of the mailing dates of the Final
Decision and Order as follows: On January 2, 2014, the mailing date of the Final Decision and
Order was extended from January 31, 2014 to February 21, 2014 to add hearing dates. On February
27, 2014, the mailing (late of the Final Decision and Order was extended to March 28, 2014 to add
hearing dates. On March 19, 2014, the mailing date of the F inal Decision and Order was extended
to April 23, 2014 to add hearing dates. On April 23, 2014, the mailing date of the Final Decision
and Order was extended to June 20, 2014 to add a hearing date. 011 May 16, 2014, the mailing date
of the Final Decision and Order was extended to July 18, 2014 in order to allow the parties to
submit briefs and proposed ﬁndings of fact by June 16, 2014. Both parties submitted Proposed
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law.

During the course of the hearing, the Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss the Parent’s claims for the
Extended School Year (ESY) 2013, with accompanying memorandum, on the grounds that the parties
had entered into a settlement agreement. The Parents opposed the motion and ﬁled an opposition brief
on March 31, 2014. The Order on the Board’s Motion to Dismiss claims regarding ESY 2013 is
contained herein. All other motions that were not previously ruled upon are hereby denied.

This Final Decision and Order, which sets forth herein the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings
of facts and conclusions 01‘1aw, and which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, are
not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was
considered in deciding this matter. T0 the extent the summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of
facts actually represent conclusions of law, they should so be considered and Vice versa. SAS
Institute Inc. v. S & H Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F. Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie
Ann F, Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993).

SUMMARY:

The Parents of a seven year old student with multiple disabilities who fell twice in school ﬁled a

Due Process Complaint alleging that they were denied rights 01" full participation in the Student’s

program and that the Student was denied a free and appropriate public education because the Board

1) failed to adequately train his paraprofessional to guard him against falls; 2) failed to provide an
2

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

appropriate physical therapy program; 3) failed to provide a proper toilet training program; and 4)
failed to create and implement a feeding and swallowing plan as provided by Connecticut
Department of Education Guidelines on Feeding and Swallowing Sewices.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CTGTS.) §10—
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4—176et0 4-178,
inclusive, §§4-181a and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

The contested issues that were raised in the Due Process Complaint and during the course of
hearing concerned the following: [H.O.—l]

Deprivation ofParenr rights of participation The Parents, who are medical professionals, allege
that the Board did not consider their serious concerns about the Student’s safety. The Parents
allege that had the Board taken their concerns seriously regarding the proper training of
paraprofessionals, the accidents could have been preventable. The Parents also allege that the
Board delayed the Parent’s ability to observe the Student’s school program. The Parents alleged
that the Board unilaterally decided to engage in a trial of independent ambulation of Student
with Student’s Paraprofessional without notifying Parent, thereby denying their full
participation in planning the Student’s program.

Lack aforalfeeding and swallowing plan. Parents believe that the Board’s Speech and
Language Therapist was inexperienced and that the Board had failed to devise an adequate IEP
that should have included a feeding component. Parents allege that the Student cannot
communicate that he is hungry and could not feed himself sufﬁciently to derive proper nutrition.
The Parents allege that a school member of the PPT had stated that the Board did not have a
responsibility for feeding skills. In addition, the Parents believe that when the Board therapist
did eventually agree to consult with Student’s private therapist to incorporate the private
therapist’s plan into the program, the exercises in the private therapist’s protocols were not
properly implemented.

Student ’5 toilefingprogram. Parents believe the Board’s program is inappropriate, that there
had been no real progress in Student’s toileting abilities and he is still wearing diapers.

Student ‘s physical therapy program. Parents allege that the Board’s program is inappropriate
because the Board assigned paraprofessionals and teachers to perform independent ambulation
and other physical therapy exercises with Student. Parents believe that the use of inexperienced
staff in pertbrming independent mobility exercises with Student poses a danger to the Student
who is a hemophiliac and is unbalanced, unsteady and re-leaming to walk.

Improper training Q/pm'apraﬁssionals leading to lack ofStudem safety in his

paraprqfessional '5' care. Parents allege that the Board paraprofessionals were improperly
trained in guarding Student and this led to two accidents. A serious fall could prove fatal to the
Student who is a hemophiliac.

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony and credibility ot‘eaeh of the witnesses, 1 find the following relevant facts:
3

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

10.

11.

The Student was born on November 1 1, 2006 and is currently identiﬁed as being eligible for and
is receiving special education services under the category of Multiple Disabilities. At the time
of the hearing, the Student was seven (7) years of age and attending the ﬁrst grade at the
Bethlehem Elementary School (BBS) (2013-2014 school year), where he also attended
kindergarten (2012—2013 school year and extended school year (ESY)). Prior to being a student
at BES, Student attended the Board’s STAR Preschool (201 l—2012 school year and ESY). [Joint
Stipulation 0f Facts]

The Student has a complex set of physical disabilities. His medical diagnoses include
“chromosome 13/15 ti'anslocation as well as chromosome 13 deletion q33”, gastrointestinal and
urologic malformations, mild asthma, seizure disorder, Vision issues, oral motor dysfunction,
hip dysplasia and hemophilia. All of the Student’s diagnoses have required medical and/or
surgical interventions. [Testimony, Mother; Testimony, E. Banﬁeld, M.D.].

The Student was born with major malformations of the gastrointestinal and urologic systems,
which had to be surgically corrected and these systems have required medical monitoring and
interventions as the Student has developed. [Testimony, Pediatrician]

The Student has asthma and a seizure disorder, which has required medication to control,
[Testlmony, E. Bartﬁeld, M.D.]

The Student has visual disabilities, which have required ongoing medical treatment and services
for the visually impaired. He was diagnosed with Strabismus and amblyopia on his right eye
due to poor muscle control. He wears corrective glasses and will require surgery. [Testimony,
E. Bartﬂeld, M.D.]

The Student has oral motor dysfunction. This contributes to signiﬁcant difﬁculties in
communication and feeding. Student did not have mobility of the tongue, which interfered with
speech. Student was unable to fully close his mouth He cannot chew and has difﬁculty
swallowing different textured foods. In April 2013, Student underwent a frenectomy, a surgical
procedure to release tissue in a posterior tongue-tie. Student receives ongoing consultation and
treatment from two private Speech and Language Pathologists for a feeding and language
program using sensory motor techniques. [Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld, M.D.; Testimony, L.
Overland]

The Student was born with hip dysplasia, a positioning and ambulation gait disability that
required major surgical correction in March of 2012 when Student was ﬁve years and ﬁve
months old. [Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld, M.D.]

The Student has hemophilia, a bleeding tendency. The hemophilia was discovered while
Student was undergoing the operation to surgically correct his hip dysplasia in spring 2012. The
tendency to bleed is both external and internal. Internal bleeding is of greater concern to
Student’s physicians. Internal bleeding that may occur in an inj ury to the head can be life
threatening to Student. [Testim0ny, E. Bartﬁeld, M.D.; Testimony, Mother]

Student requires continuing care by specialist physicians. In addition to his Pediatrician, he
receives continuing treatment and monitoring by an Orthopedic Surgeon, an Urologist, a
Nephrologist, an Ophthalmologist, an ENT (Ear Nose and Throat), a Hematologist, a
Neurologist and a Geneticist. [Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld, M.D.; P-37]

Since the ﬁrst year of life, Student’s various physicians have prescribed medications that impact
his functioning such as ﬁne motor, speech, adaptive skills, gross motor and ability to toilet. Over
the time that Student has attended STAR preschool and BBS, Student’s medical prescriptions
have changed such that the Student’s functioning has also been impacted. [Testimony, E.
Bartﬁeld, M.D.]

The Student has an Individualized Health Care Plan, which has been overseen by school nurses.

4

Ju1y 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

12.

13.

14.

16.

The Student’s individualized Health Care Plan calls for the Student’s one—to—one
paraprofessional to wear a walkie—talkie. 1n the event of an emergency, the paraprofessional is
to call the school nurse or dial for 91 1. Because of Student’s hemophilia, the School Nurse has
in her possession a medication to administer to slow bleeding in the event of an injury.
[Testimony, K. Cuikin; Testimony, Mother; Testimony, A. Mealey]

The Mother is a licensed Physician’s Assistant W110 is employed by Southbui‘y Training School
in Southbury, Connecticut to provide primary medical care to students with special needs. The
Father is a Nurse. [Testimony, Mother] Student’s Pediatrician describes the Parents as
extremely dedicated and very knowledgeable about the Student’s very complicated medical
condition. [Testimony, E. Baitﬁeld, M.D.]

The Student began receiving early intervention services through Family J unction Birth to Three
in April 2007 when he was four months old. Student began attending STAR Preschool when he
was two years and eleven months old. Birth to Three sewices staff consulted with STAR
Preschool staff members and continued support until the Student was three years old.
[Testimony, Mother; Joint Stipulation of Facts]

He attended STAR Preschool from 2009 to 2012 where he was found eligible for special
education services under the eligibility category ofDevelopmental Delay. W hile at STAR
Preschool, Student received occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech and language
services and consultation from a teacher of the visually impaired through the State of
Connecticut, He also received Extended School Yea1'(ESY) services in 2010, 201 1 and 2012.
Since the 2011—2012 school year, Student has been using an iPad2 with software known as
TouchChat AAC for communication in the school environment. [B-17]

. Student attended kindergarten at BES and received special education services for the 2012—2013

school year and ESY under the category of Multiple Disabilities. At the time of the hearing, he
was attending ﬁrst grade and receiving special education services for the 2013-2014 school
year. [Testimony, Mother; Testimony, K. Culkin; Testimony, B. Woodward; Testimony, J.
Cook]

On February 21, 2010, when Student was four years old, the PPT met to review the Student’s
overall progress in the 2010 to 2011 school year and to discuss the family’s request to begin
toilet training. The STAR Preschool team felt that it was important to employ a program of trip
training and all agreed that at an appropriate time for trip training, the goals and objectives
would be developed for that process. The PPT recommended the following: daily
documentation of bowel movement consistency per parent request for monitoring of medication;
obtain appropriate seat for toilet while exposing Student to the bathroom and toileting; the team
agreed to “come up with an appropriate modiﬁcation of sign for potty for Student to use
functionally during the school day and daycare and home environments; be certain that diaper
changing times are different from toilet exposure times with peers.” The toileting procedure
was described as follows: 1. Begin to check Student every half hour to check if dry or wet in
order to determine a pattern (shoﬁen if need be) 2. Look for dry times to leave classroom (with
consideration for appropriateness of interfering with program/services) 3. Pair sign with picture
and verbal cue for bathroom/toilet 4. Sit Student for one minute, get him up and state,
“bathroom all done” 5, Keep a running record of any elimination. The Parents had made a
request that toilet training begin and not to trip train but to offer the Student the opportunity to
visit the bathroom with peers 2 times a day to see if he would eliminate.

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

17.

18.

19.

2011—2012 School Year

On May 24, 201 l, the PPT met to conduct an amiual review of progress and plan the Student’s
lEP for the 201 1—2012 (third preschool) year: The following information and actions were taken
with regard to toileting, feeding and gross motor skills:

Toileting: Student was toileting with success on a daily basis. He was not yet expressing a need
to use the toilet independently but would void when staff would take him to the bathroom. The
Student’s IEP did not include any goals and objectives for toileting. [P-SO]

Feeding: During feeding, he was able to hold a container with one hand and use the other to
scoop food and place it in his mouth independently. “To encourage lip closure staff suggested
sipping a thicker liquid tln‘ough a curly straw. Liquids like Danimals yogurt, milkshakes would
be good things to try.” The Student’s IEP did not include any goals and objectives that address
any of the Student’s feeding or swallowing except with respect to Self Help; these were:
Measurable Annual Goal #132 Demonstrate increased palticipation in self help activities
required within the school setting. Objective #2: Demonstrate the ability to scoop food with
spoon and bring to month without spilling. Measurable Annual Goal #14: [Student] will
demonstrate increased participation in selt‘help activities required within the school setting.
Objective #12: [Student] will drink from a cup independently Objective #13: [Student] will
drink water from a spelt top water bottle independently. [P—SO]

Gross Motor: The Student had increased protective responses and had made satisfactoty
progress when kneeling and would learn to kneel walk next year. He had been working on
standing at a table and squat in order to pick something up. He could get in and out of the
Rifton chair as he pushes up, and could push back independently. He will work on coming to a
stand by a venical surface such as a wall and pushing up off the floor with his hands in the
middle of the room. He goes up and down the steps to the sink The Student’s YEP contained 3
goals to “[i]mprove functional gross motor abilities in the classroom environment” and
[i]mprove postural control for functional motor activities.” and many objectives which included
specialized instruction in a variety of gross motor skills. This instruction included but was not
limited to kneeling, standing, picking up objects from the ﬂoor, transferring from Rifton chair to
walker, standing in a balanced stance, walking sideways, walking with a walker in the
classroom from one activity to another for 1520 feet; using a walker to maneuver around
obstacles with minimal adult assistance; walking with his walker up the ramp to the door;
learning to negotiate uneven surfaces on the playground or grass using his walker; stepping up
and down the railing to wash hands at sink with minimal adult assistance; stepping on stairs
using an alternate step pattern, [PvSO]

Student’s Preschool Performance Report was issued in January 2012‘ In the area of Physical
Development, Student received an “E” in “[a]tte1npts to dress, eat and toilet independently with
some success. Student was not marked in two other areas: “Manages most aspects ofdressing,
eating and toileting independently” and “Dress, eats and toilets independently.” The teacher
noted “[Student] wants to walk in the room without his walker with increasing frequency”

In January 012012, the Student’s private Speech and Language Pathologist, Kathy Hendricks,
referred the Parents for a consultation with Lori Overland, 21 Speech and Language Pathologist,
whose specialty is a sensory motor approach to feeding Ms. Overland holds a Masters of
Science in Speech and Language Pathology and a Neuro—Developmental Treatment Cettiﬁcate
From City Kids, Inc. Chicago. She has been a speech and language pathologist for over 33 years
and lectures internationally and has published a book as well as articles in professional journals
0n the sensory approach to feeding. She is licensed by New York and Connecticut and is

6

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

certiﬁed by the American Speech Language Hearing Association. In addition, she is a certiﬁed
teacher in Connecticut and also holds a Teacher of Speech and Hearing Handicapped Permanent
Certiﬁcate in New York State. [Testimony, Mother, Testimony, L, Overland].

Ms. Overland conducted an oral motor/feeding and oral placement/speech evaluation of Student
that revealed the Student’s physical disabilities with feeding and swallowing food, The
evaluator noted structural weaknesses that compromised jaw strength and stability, The Student
did not have a functional chew to support mastication of solid foods. He used his teeth to clear
a spoon. He could not use his cheeks to support sticking, chewing, swallowing or to stabilize
solid bolus. [B-S, Testimony, L, Overland]

Ms. Overland developed a program plan dated January 31, 2012, which contained exercises for
both feeding and speech. The plan was to be implemented three times a day. The various
components of the plan included sensory/prefeeding, feeding and oral speech exercises, which
included massage and use of sensory inducing tools. [B~5]. The sensory approach to feeding is
an established practice and Ms. Overland’s goal in developing the plan was to help Student be
able to move from a purely puree diet with some meltable solids (such as Cheetos) to being able
to eat table foods. Motor skills for eating and speech do not necessarily have a one—to-one
correspondence. The skills necessary for lip closure for sound production are not the same as
lip closure for eating. There is controversy surrounding the use of these techniques (oral
placement) for purposes of sound production related to speech but not for feeding. [Testimony,
Overland]

The STAR Preschool PPT met on February 28, 2012 to discuss the Overland evaluation, a
behavior plan and to discuss homebound instruction after the Student’s upcoming surgery in
March of2012t The team indicated that there was ample time to review the Overland
evaluation and how the Overland program components would be added to the Student’s daily
routine. The staff had already attempted some of the Overland program plan. Some techniques,
such as the use of “chewy tubes” to help Student bite, were successful. Others, such as the use
of “z—vibe” appear to have caused discomfort. The staff noted that the Student could drink 50%
of a container of yogurt with a straw and was able to drink with his lips closed from a juice box
with a straw. N0 goals and objectives were revised or added into the IEP for feeding. The
Team did not recommend an evaluation for Student’s disabilities with feeding. [B-7]

The staff also created a behavioral plan for Student’s inappropriate behaviors. Student would
sometimes engage in loud outbursts in the classroom; inappropriately reach out and grab other
students to get attention and drop from his walker to the ﬂoor when he would not want to
comply with a teacher or paraprofessional request. The staff observed this behavior as the
Student “acting silly.” [B-S; Testimony, M. Zeigler; Testimony, K. Bischoff]

In March 2012, Student underwent a major surgery to correct hip dysplasia in both hips. The
Student’s Pediatrician described this operation as a “massive surgery, as it had to be done on
both hips and especially as it had to be done on an older child.” Various metallic pieces of
hardware were left in place to stabilize, to form the joint and to keep the femur where it should
be in relation to the acetabulum. Casts were placed on both legs after the surgery During this
operation, Student’s surgeons discovered that Student has Factor 7 Deﬁciency, a form of
hemophilia. While Student was receiving multiple blood transfusions, Student continued to
bleed, His blood was not clotting properly while the transfusions were infused The Mother
notiﬁed Student’s various teachers of the discovery of hemophilia while Student was at the
hospital as Student’s various preschool teachers were concerned about Student’s well being in
this very complicated surgery and were texting Mother to ﬁnd out how Student was faring.
[Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld, M.D.; Testimony, Mother]

7

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

After discharge from the hospital, Student received homebound tutoring from March 16, 2012
for approximately four weeks for an hour a day from a rotation of STAR Preschool staff.
Physical therapy services were offered but declined by the Parents because the Student was
receiving physical therapy from his private physical therapist When Student’s casts were
removed, Student developed an abscess, which required medical attention and readmission to
the hospital due to kidney stones. Student returned to school on April 24, 2014. Shortly
thereafter, he was readmitted to the hospital due to a possible stress fracture at the surgical site
on May 2, 2012. He returned to STAR preschool in a cast and in a wheelchair on May 7, 2012.
[Testimony, Pediatrician; Testimony, Mother; 13—17]

Student’s mood and functioning changed signiﬁcantly post operatively. [B-l7; Testimony, E.
Baitﬁeld] Prior to the surgery, Student was playful, engaged and a sometimes mischievous little
boy. (Testimony, M. Zeigler] He showed a genuine interest in peers in the classroom. Though
he was limited in his ability to vocalize, he would sit next to his peers and reach out and grab
peers by their arm or hair to gain their attention to play. He had to learn to signal for attention
in socially appropriate ways. He had episodes of “acting silly”; would drop to the ﬂoor while
standing in his walker and when refusing to comply with his paraprofessional or teacher’s
requests. [Testimony, M. Zeiglei‘] A Functional Behavior Plan was developed to address these
behaviors on February 22, 2012. However, this behavior plan was not implemented for any
great length of time because the Student undeiwent his hip surgery shottly after the behavior
plan was developed. [Testimony, K. Bischoff] The record is clear that the surgery had a
profound effect on Student. After his return from surgery, Student was unsure of what to do in
the classroom. He was less focused in classroom activities. He was observed by his special
education teacher to be hanging the arms of his chair, wiping his eyes and pulling his hair; he
could not focus on items when he was asked to make choices on the l-Pad he was using to
vocalize his choices. Post—operatively, the STAR team created a second behavior plan to
decrease unwanted behaviors such as inappropriate touching of peers in circle or group activity
time; playing with his tongue and repeatedly hitting his chin with his fist, The behavior plan did
not include any student behavior in dropping to the ﬂoor. [B-l4]

The surgery rendered Student unable to walk. On return to school, the Student’s orthopedic
surgeon prescribed transpott to and from school in a wheelchair and school physical therapy for
range ot‘ motion and strengthening. [B-ll p.5] As ol‘June 2012, Student was working on trying
to increase his ability to tolerate lower extremity weight bearing and increasing functional gross
motor abilities, At the end of the 201 1—2012 school year, Student was just beginning to transfer
in and out ofa wheelchair. He could only stand up at a table 01' his walker with adult assistance
for short periods. He could walk several steps with adult assistance. He was beginning with a
walker again for a distance 01‘20—30 feet with adult assistance before tiring. [B-l7]

On May 10, 2012, with Parent consent, a PPT was convened without the Parents. The Mother
consented to a Triennial evaluation. The PPT planned to share the Triennial results and reports
with the Bethlehem Elementary School staff at a PPT meeting scheduled for June 5, 2012. The
evaluations did not include an evaluation for Student’s feeding disability. {B—l3]

The PPT met on June 5, 2012 to conduct the annual review, review the results of the Triennial
re-evaluations and plan for the 2012-2013 (kindergarten) school year. In attendance were the
Mother and the staff from BES and STAR, including the BES kinderganen teacher; the school
physical therapist; the STAR speech and language pathologist and the BES speech and language
pathologist and the BES special education team leader. [B-16J The Student’s primary disability
was changed from Developmental Delay to M ultiple Disabilities. The Student’s medical
information, including his Factor 7 deﬁciency and hemophilia was discussed. The Mother was

8

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

30,

31.

32.

33.

asked to provide a list of current doctors, their specialties and lists and doses of medications for
the school nurse to be included in the Student’s medical plan. The PPT made recommendations
for Student to attend ESY in 2012 and for transportation to and from STAR. The Student was to
receive 30-minute sessions each ofoccupational therapy, physical therapy and speech and
language therapy twice a week.

ESY 2012 and 2012 -2013 School Year

The June 5, 2012 PPT developed and revised the 2012-2013 IEP. Included were the following
services relevant to this hearing: “A paraprofessional will be assigned to [Student] for safety and
assistance with self help skills and academic instruction/support.” Student would receive the
following related sewices: Speech and Language Therapy: 3x/30 minutes direct and 1x 30
minutes consult to staff; Physical Therapy 2x/30 minutes per month paraprofessional consult
and 2x/30 minutes per month with Physical Education consult; 2x/45 minute sessions for direct
physical therapy. The IEP provided that the Student would receive OT, PT and speech and
language therapy on a one to one basis. IEP objectives were added for toileting under Self Help
goals as follows: Measurable Goal #16, Objective #4: [Student] will participate in his toileting
needs with appropriate modiﬁcations and objective #5 “[Student‘] will request to use the
bathroom by sign or use the iPad at a minimum of one time per day. [B—16] Despite Student’s
limited progress in “drinking from a sport top bottle [B-13] and reporting that [Student] “drinks
well from a looped straw, holds a juice box in a supportive holder, holds containers in his left
hand while scooping with a spoon on the right. He is working on chewing and needs
encouragement to bite off small pieces 01‘ a Cheeto on his molar,” the IEP included no new
goals and objectives on feeding other than those included in the 201 1-2012 1EP1 No feeding
evaluation was conducted and no feeding plan was developed and no motor exercises related to
feeding were described. The Board did not solicit input from physicians about the Student’s
medical, mobility or functional status. [13—16]

With respect to Gross Motor, IEP goals and objectives of the previous year were repeated
because the hip surgery had left Student unable to walk. The Student’s IEP included goals and
objectives for ESY 2012 and the 2012 to 2013 school year. These objectives called for Student
to re-learn skills he had previously mastered but had lost because of hip surgery. Most 2012 -
2013 school year gross motor goals and objectives were the same as the previous school year
with the addition of a new objective: being able to maintain a standing position and paIticipate
in an independent reciprocal ball catch by throwing the ball a distance of ﬁve feet. [B-16]

The School Physical Therapist was not able to work in ESY 2012 and Student received physical
therapy from a substitute physical therapist Student mastered the following objectives at the
end ol‘ESY 2012: to go from sitting to standing with adult assistance; to stand and pivot to
transfer from wheel chair to school chair with supervision and sit on the floor; walking with a
walker and minimal adult assistance a distance of 50 feet with a few rests. He was making
satisfactory progress on the following objectives: sitting on the ﬂoor; crawl on hands and knees
for a distance of 20—25 feet; standing without suppoit for 10—15 seconds; and will walk with one
hand held 15-20 steps with adequate balance and control. [B-16]

Student began the 2012—20 1 3 kindergarten school years a few days after the school term began.
The following activities were undertaken in preparation for the Student’s transition to
kindergarten. From J anuary to February 2012, the school physical therapist and occupational
therapist spent approximately six hours each to assess for and order equipment for Student. In
April, the school staff obtained a consultation from an orientation and mobility instwctor from

9

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

34.

35.

36.

the Connecticut Bureau of Education and Services for the Blind. On April 27, STAR staff
visited BES with the Mother to meet BES staff and later, STAR team members held a PPT with
the Mother. The Mother testiﬁed that during this PPT meeting, the Mother asked for
paraprofessionals to be trained and be prepared to work with the Student because of his recent
surgery. On May 18 and June 4, 2012, BES certiﬁed staff Visited STAR Preschool to observe
Student in his classroom. On June 11, Student toured BES and met teachers and staff. On
August 30, 2012, the BES staff met with the preschool paraprofessional who had been working
with the Student, Two of the BES staff members, the occupational therapist and physical
therapist, had already worked with the Student in preschool, The BES Speech and Language
Pathologist and general education Kindergaiten teacher had not worked with Student. The
discussion involved Student’s forms of communication; interests; his oral motor skills (“doesn’t
chew (sucks)”); his behavior and the bathroom procedure. There was no discussion of the
Student’s mobility, balance or medical fragility. [B-58; B~59g Testimony, Mother; Testimony,
M. Zeigler; Testimony, G. Leslie] Prior to the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year, BES
staff decided that Student would have a rotation of three paraprofessionals. Each of these
paraprofessionals was assigned to Student for one day before being rotated to another student.
The Student was one of a number of incoming special education students who were introduced
by BES staff and discussed at a general classroom paraprofessional meeting. Topics of
discussions were general and involved the Student’s disabilities and interests. There was no
discussion about the Student’s hemophilia, mobility, balance problems and Student’s recent hip
surgery. [Testilnony, A. Mealey] The classroom paraprofessionals received their training with
Student by observing the physical therapist, the occupational therapist and other staff. With
respect to Student’s gross motor skills, the paraprofessionals each observed the physical
therapist during physical therapy with the Student, which at that time could have been about
once a week for 45 minutes. The paraprofessionals were not given any information with regard
to the Student’s medical status of being a hemophiliac. The paraprofessionals did not receive
any speciﬁc instruction around Student’s safety in ambulation except what they observed with
the physical therapist. ["l‘estimony, A. Mealeyl

On September 6, 2012, a few (lays aﬁer the Student began kindergarten; the Mother received a
telephone call from the BES Speech and Language Pathologist, The Mother testiﬁed credibly
that the Speech and Language Pathologist told her during this phone call that the Student fell.
At the time of the incident, the Student was standing at his walker and suddenly let go. The
paraprofessional who was standing next to him did not catch the Student to prevent his body
from hitting the ground. The Speech and Language Pathologist testiﬁed that the purpose of the
phone call was out of a concern that the Student might have had a seizure because she had
observed a blank stare on his face. [Testimony, Mother; Testimony, J. Cook]

Although the Speech and Language Pathologist and other Board staff would describe this fall in
testimony as an incident where the Student “sat back” or “ﬂoor dropped”, it is clear that the
Student’s body hit the ground. [Testimony, J. Cook] There was no chair for which the Student
could have “sat back”, There was no urgency or concern paid to this fall by the BES staff. The
term “sat back” is euphemistic terminology used to minimize the fall that the Student
experienced. This terminology would be repeated again during the course of the hearing by
Board staff that were not witnesses to the fall; and also later repeated to an independent physical
therapy consultant 1" rotn the Capital Region Education Council (CREC) who was left with the
impression that there had been no fall at all, [Testiinony, Brilla]

Even though the Speech and Language Pathologist had already attended a June PPT meeting
that discussed Student’s recent hip surgery and tendency to bleed, it did not occur to her that this

10

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 140276

37.

38.

40.

fall could have been signiﬁcant in impeding the Student’s ongoing post-operation recovery.
{Testimony, J . Cook]. However, the educational record Clearly demonstrates this. The Student
was in physical therapy working on being able to stand independently for 10-15 secondsjust a
few weeks prior to the fall. [B-16] It is likely the Student could not stand at his walker for any
great length of time before becoming tired and letting go. The Student probably was standing at
the walker for a longer length ot‘time than he could tolerate. His paraprofessional would not
have known because she was not trained and did not know about the limitations of Student’s
physical stamina. Further, the paraprofessional would not have known how to guard the Student
from the fall. The record is bare of any information regarding training of the Student’s
paraprofessionals to guard him against a fall or to recognize signs that the Student was fatigued.
The record reveals that paraprofessionals learned by watching certiﬁed staff interact with the
Students This “on the job” training was conducted through obsewation and imitation of
activities of certiﬁed staff and not through a conscious and methodical training program based
upon the Student’s physical and medical proﬁle and his unique set ot‘needs.

The Mother was very upset after this fall and immediately contacted the school. The Mother
reached out to staff and administrators. She asked to come to the school to observe the
educational environment. The Mother testiﬁed that when she came to the school to obsewe the
Student ambulating with his walker, the paraprofessional was not properly guarding the Student
by standing in back of his walker. During her observation, the Mother observed the
paraprofessional greeting other people in the hallway as the Student was ambulating. At one
point, the Student let go from his walker and started to walk away only to be redirected back to
the walker by the Mother. There appeared to be no urgency on behalf of the paraprofessional.
The Mother testiﬁed the observation left her very upset because the Student was postoperatively
still in a very fragile state. [Testiniony, Mother] Indeed, the Student’s bones were still being
held together post operatively by metal pieces and not yet totally healed. A fall could have
jeopardized recovery. [P-4; Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld M.D.] In addition, Student had hemophilia
and a fall could cause internal bleeding that could pose a risk of safety to the Student.
(Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld MD.]

The Mother contacted the School Physical Therapist immediately after this incident. The
School Physical Therapist testiﬁed that she had been thinking about a physical therapy protocol,
which had not been reduced to writing. This protocol contained information on the Student’s
habits and procedures in movement and transitions. At the time the protocol was developed, the
Student was using a front facing walker. The Student had fallen backwards when he let go off
the walket: The ﬁrst paragraph of the protocol states as follows: “When walking or moving
from one position to another, stand behind [Student] in case he falls backwards.”

, On September 12, 2012, the Mother emailed the Director oi‘Special Sewices that she had

spoken to the School Physical Therapist who stated that she would be going over the protocol
with the BES staff. The Mother stated, “I wanted to express my on-going concern to you that
the staff at present are not trained and I remain worried that his safety is still at issue. I think it’s
lucky that he wasn’t injured more seriously and feel there is clearly potential for a more serious
incident. Please call or email me. I am curious to know your plans. Thank you very much. I
just can’t emphasize enough that [Student] is very fragile right now and I am extremely worried
about him.” The Mother testiﬁed that she did not receive a response to this email for six days.
[P-S; Testimony, Mother]

On September 15, 2012, the Student’s Orthopedic Surgeon, Brian G. Smith, M.D., Chief of
Pediatric Orthopedics and an Associate Professor at Yale New Haven Hospital and Yale
University School ofMedicine sent a facsimile letter to the BBS, In pertinent pait, Dr. Smith’s

11

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

41.

42.

431

44.

letter states that the Student “deserves adequate care at school with a paraprofessional. Given
his diagnosis and recent surgeries it is critical he have an experienced individual work with him
that knows his mobility, motion and actions. Please allow him an individual suited to his needs
in order to prevent falling or other setbacks that will prove harmful for [Student].” The letter
ends with the following paragraph: “Please feel free to contact my office with any questions or
concerns and thank you in advance for a1lowing us to participate in his care.” It is unclear
whether anyone on the school staff working with the Student reviewed this letter or took it into
account. The School Physical Therapist testiﬁed that she never saw this letter. The Director of
Special Services did not remember reviewing this letter. It is likely that this letter was never
reviewed by school—based members of the PPT. The Director of Special Services testiﬁed that
if a physician’s note were to be faxed to the BES school ofﬁce, it would not come to her
attention. Sometimes, the school ofﬁce fax is unattended and sometimes it would be routed to
the school nurse. If the school nurse received the physician’s note then the school nurse would
put the in formation into the Student’s ﬁle; it would not come to special services staff and she
would not receive it. In any event, it is clear that Dr. Smith was not contacted as a result of the
lettetx [P-4; Testimony, G. Leslie; Testimony, K. Culkin]

On September 20, 2012, the Yale Hemostasis Center, who were treating physicians for
Student’s hemophilia, addressed a letter to “Dear School Administrators” and stated, in
pertinent part, the following: “[Student] has Factor VII (7) deﬁciency, a rare bleeding disorder
that places him at risk for prolonged bleeding with injury and following surgery. Small
lacerations are rarely a problem, but [Student] may have prolonged nosebleeds and mouth
bleeding with oral injury. Head, neck and abdominal injuries from falls or other trauma are
particularly concerning due to the potential for internal bleeding. It is very impoﬁant for staff
working with [Student] understand the potential for bleeding and be trained to minimize the risk
of falls as he works to develop gross motor skills.” The letter ends as follows: “Please do not
hesitate to contact our ofﬁce if you have any questions or concerns about [Student’s] care.” The
next sentence of the letter provides telephone numbers for the staff of Yale Hemostasis Center.
['P—10] The Mother testiﬁed that she speciﬁcally recalled handing a copy of this letter to the
Director ot‘Special Services at a meeting on September 27, 2012. [Testimony, Mother]

The Mother also worked aggressively to change the paraprofessional situation. In addition to
contacting the school administrators, the Mother reached out to several State of Connecticut
Agencies, one of which assigned an Educational Liaison to intercede in the situation. The
Mother wanted the Educational Liaison to observe the Student at school. The Director of
Special Services resisted and in an email to the Mother, stated, in pertinent part, that “[t]he
district is not obligated to, and does not authorize individuals not afﬁliated with our school or
retained by the District to assess our staff or programs. As we have discussed with you, we feel
that the District has (sic) safe environment for your son. Our staff is trained and knowledgeable
about your son’s needs. Additionally, the staff is conﬁdent that we are providing a safe program
for him.” [P—9]

The Mother insisted that the Student’s former Preschool Paraprofessional return to be the
Student’s kindergarten paraprofessional. The Mother testiﬁed that she insisted on the return of
the Preschool Paraprotessional, not because the paraprofessional had any specialized knowledge
or training, but because the Preschool Paraprofessional was the only option of having someone
who had experience with the Student. Later, the Mother would ask the school, including the
Region 14 Superintendent of Schools, for another paraprofessional who had experience with
children with physical disabilities but the request would be denied. [P-18; Testimony, Mother]
The Connecticut Educational Liaison was eventually given access to observe the Student in the

12

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

45.

46.

school environment. The school assigned the preschool paraprofessional to assist and answer
questions of the BES paraprofessionals. The preschool paraprofessional returned to STAR after
spending a short time at BES. [Testimony, Mother; Testimony, M. Zeigler]

Notwithstanding the letters from Dr. Smith and Yale Hemostasis Center emphasizing the risk of
dangers of falls, BES staff minimized the danger of the September fall in their testimony
Instead the Board staff focused their attention on the possibility that Student might have been
suffering from a seizure during this incident. During the hearing, the Director of Special
Services testiﬁed that the Parents were not agreeable to allowing the school to contact the
Student’s doctor and that consent was not granted until April of 2013 after the Mother called the
Region 14 Medical Advisor [Testimony, K. Culkin; B—24] Presumably, this testimony was to
suggest to this Hearing Ofﬁcer that the Parents were unreasonable in not allowing the school
access to medical providers and that their actions were contributory to any problems with
progrannning for Student. Aﬁer reviewing all of the evidence in the record, this Hearing
Ofﬁcer does not ﬁnd this suggestion to be credible for a number of reasons. First, the School
District had always been provided with medical information and consent. In fact, the Mother,
who is a licensed Physician’s Assistant, provided medical status on the Student at every
opportunity. Second, the Parents provided consent for contact with Student when requested,
including consents and doctor’s notes for school services as reﬂected in PPT minutes. Third,
the seizure issue had nothing to do with the Student’s fall. The information that was being
sought from doctors had to do with whether the Student was having signs of seizures in October
2012, about a month after the ﬁrst fall in September. The School Nurse was developing a
medical plan for seizures and sought information. Parents, who are medical professionals, tried
to address the school’s concerns on their own by offering to take requests to the physicians. The
Parents were worried that the Staff would cause changes to the Student’s seizure medication
regimen by misreporting information. [Testimony, Mother; Testimony, K. Culkin] In any
event, the record is barren of any seizure episodes while Student was attending BES, In fact, the
Student’s Pediatrician testiﬁed that the Student’s seizure disorder had been under control with
medication. [Testimony, E. Baitﬂeld M.Di] Finally, there is no correspondence between the
school district and the Mother or to anyone immediately after the September fall to suggest that
seizure was an issue at the time of the fall. The documentary evidence of the notes and the
correspondence in the aﬁermath ot‘ the Student’s September fall does not support the Board’s
version of the story. Signiﬁcantly with respect to the fall, the Board made no effort to contact
the correct physicians, the Orthopedic Surgeon and Hematologists who wrote to the Board with
relevant in formation about Student’s medical fragility and welcomed open dialogue by
providing their telephone numbers and contact information [Testimony, Mother; Testimony,
Culkin; P-4; P—10]

A few months later in February of 2013, the Mother received a telephone call from the School
Nurse that the Student had fallen. The Student had hit his face on a bookshelf while
independently ambulating across the Resource Room without his walker. The Student sustained
an injury to the face and his nose was bleeding. F ortunately, the bleeding stopped. The Father
went to retrieve the Student from school. The Kindergarten Paraprofessional who was caring
for Student testiﬁed that she overheard the Father remarking that something to the effect that
“children who were learning to walk fall.” The Board repeated this remark in its post—hearing
briel‘ to excuse or minimize this event. The Father was not a witness at the hearing and was not
available to deny or explain this remark. Leaving aside the credibility of this testimony, the
evidence in the hearing clearly establishes that falls of this nature are an anomaly even in
rehabilitation clinics and hospitals. Ifa fall does happen in a rehabilitation clinic and hospital,

13

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

47.

48‘

the staff investigates the incident to ﬁnd out how it occurred to prevent them from happening in
the future Falls are statistically tracked in clinical settings to determine compliance with safety
mandates. [Testimony, E. Bartﬁeld M.D.} This type of injury to the head was exactly the type
the Mother was urgently working to prevent. Nevertheless, it did occur, Quite fottunately, the
fall did not result in a serious injury, concussion 01' internal bleeding that could potentially have
been life threatening to the Student. ['l‘estimony, E. Bartﬁeld M.D.]

After this second fall, the Mother agitated for changes from the School. The Mother contacted
the Region 14 Superintendent of Schools and the Director of Special Services. [P-22;
Testimony, Mother] The school conducted an investigation and reenactment, which did not
satisfy the Mother. There were only two witnesses to this incident, the Kindergaiten
Paraprofessional who was caring for the Student and another paraprofessional, who was
involved in the previous fall and who was attending to another student. The Kindergarten
Special Education Teacher was not in the room and was attending a meeting at the time that the
accident occurred. Student’s Kindergarten Pai'api'ofessional received her education as a regular
education teacher. She worked as a paraprofessional part time before being hired as a full time
employee of the school district. Her experience included working with students with learning
disabilities. She had attended some meetings for training to work students With autism. She had
no experience with children with the Student’s multiple physical disabilities and unsteady gait.
She testiﬁed that the training she received with the Student was on the job through watching the
various licensed 01‘ certiﬁed professionals practice on the Student and observing. The
professional licensed staff, such as the School Physical Therapist and the Speech and Language
Pathologist, would instruct her and then watch her perform the task She did not remember how
many times she was directly supewised before performing oral motor or physical therapy
exercises. She estimated the number to be a few times, leaving the impression that she had only
received a cursory amount ofti'aining before providing these normally complex sewices for the
Student. When performing these related physical therapy or oral motor services, she was
supervised by the Special Education teaeheix [Testimony, A. Mealey]

That the training ofthe Kindergarten Paraprofessional was inadequate is conﬁrmed by the
testimony regarding the events that led to the February fall. Student’s School Physical Therapist
regards her style as “aggressive? She liked to worked the Student and felt the Student
responded and worked hard in physical therapy. She testiﬁed that she has never contacted the
Student’s physicians regarding her physical therapy program. She was able to call if she wanted
but never felt the need to. The Physical Therapist testiﬁed that, at the time of the fall, she was
conducting a “trial” of independent ambulation in the Resource Room to allow the student to
walk without the walker. This use of paraprofessionals to perform this procedure, referred to as
“hands off guided walking”, was not described in the Student’s IEP not previously discussed
with the Parent at any PPT meeting. The El? states that physical therapy services would be
provided by the Physical Therapist. The Physical therapist also spent time consulting with staff.
[B-16] The Physical Thet'apist’s plan was to conduct this trial and let the Parents know of the
changes after the fact‘ [Testimony, G. Leslie] The Student had been walking without a walker
in the Resource Room with the Physical Therapist, with the Special Education] Teacher and the
Kindergarten Paraprotessional obsewing. The Student was allowed to walk a few steps at ﬁrst
without any physical support. This “hands off guided walking” was introduced to the
Paraprofessional and the Special Education Teacher. The Paraprofessional testiﬁed that she was
ﬁrst asked to practice walking with the Student for a few feet. She testified that on one Friday
afternoon she was told by the Special Education Teacher that the school based team had decided
that the Student would be walking a lot farther, from just a few feet to about 20 feet to his

14

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

49.

50.

walker, which was parked by the door of the Resource Room. The following Monday
afternoon, the Kindergarten Paraprofessional attempted to walk the Student for 20 feet. Midway
through the walk, the Student lost his balance and fell into a bookshell‘head ﬁrst causing the
bleeding nose. Both the Special Education Teacher and the Paraprofessional believed the
Student was able to walk the distance of 20 feet. [Testimony, Mealey; Testimony, Woodward]
The School Physical Therapist was confronted with this testimony during the hearing and
looked surprised. She testiﬁed that at the time of the fall, the Student could not physically
ambulate this distance of 20 feet and that, in fact, he would lose his balance in the middle. The
Kindergarten Paraprofessional and the Special Education Teacher also testiﬁed that they had
understood the protocol for guarding was to stand behind the Student as contained in the
September protocol. The Physical Therapist testiﬁed that this was not what she had taught the
staff and not appropriate for this type of independent ambulation. Whatever training was given
to the paraprofessional was totally ineffective. In addition, the poor communication
compounded the situation. The root of this unfortunate event was the Physical Therapist’s
misplaced reliance on personnel who had no previous professional training in, or understanding
of body mechanics and mobility. Later, the Student’s Orthopedic Surgeon would prescribe the
use of a gait belt. A gait belt is a safety measure allowing the Student to be held by a person
assisting in ambulation. It was also a recommendation of the CREC Independent Physical
Therapy Consultant who would later be retained by the school to evaluate the physical therapy
program. The School Physical Therapist testiﬁed that she had considered a gait belt but decided
against it in her physical therapy program with the Student. [P—22; Testimony, A. Mealey;
Testimony, G. Leslie; Testimony, B. Woodward; Testimony, Brilla; P-72]

After the fall, the Mother called the School District Medical Adviser to register her concern
about the Student’s safety. The Medical Adviser called the Director of Special Services and the
conversation turned to the possibility of Student seizures. There is no evidence in any record
relating any seizure activity to either of the Student’s falls. Subsequent to the call with the
Medical Adviser, the Director of Special Services emailed the Mothei: The last line of this
email is signiﬁcant. It states, in pertinent part, as follows: “In addition, it is my understanding
that [Student] will be having surgery during the week of April 8. Please have [Student’s]
physician also provide information regarding whether he/she believes that [Student] will require
any additional or different accommodations or modiﬁcations to his school program in light of
his physical condition after surgery, and it‘ so, for what duration of time.” It is important to note
that this was the ﬁrst time in the educational record in which the school considered the Student’s
physician’s point of view in the Student’s LEP. The Director of Special Services testiﬁed that
generally a physician’s input is forwarded to the School Nurse for the Student’s health care plan
and is not part 01" the IEP development process. After this event, the Director of Special
Services contacted the Student’s Pediatrician with the Parent’s consent. The Pediatrician was
asked for advice with Student’s toiletiug issues. [B—24; Testimony, Mother; Testimony, K.
Culkin; Testimony, E. Bai'tﬁeld, M.D.]

On March 19, 2013, the Student’s Pediatrician faxed a letter to the School, Which stated in
pertinent part as follows: “His balance, proprioception and gait, though, are not fully developed
and he requires specialized physical and occupational therapy. During periods of independent
ambulation, it is medically indicated for [Student] to receive specialized support from therapists
to minimize his fall risk and continue his ambulation.” [P-48] It is not clear from the record
whether D11 Bartﬂeld’s letter reached anyone. The Physical Therapist did not remember seeing
a copy of the letter. In any event, the Student did not engage in independent (hands off guided
walking) ainbulation with a paraprofessional from the time of the Februaiy 25, 2013 fall until

15

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

51.

52.

53.

April of 2013‘ [B—23] D11 Bartﬁeid testiﬁed at the hearing and stated that as of today, the
Student’s medical needs for independent ambulation remains the same. In his medical opinion,
the Student needs professional suppott during periods of independent ambulation. [Testimony,
Bartﬁeld] This medical opinion is supported and shared by the Student’s other physicians. For
instance, a letter dated .Iune 14, 2013 from Linda Huh, M.D., Student’s neurologist, explains the
nature 01‘ Student’s medical disability. She states that “[h]e has a complicated neurological
disorder which predisposes him to unexpected seizures in addition to tone and motor strength
deﬁcits which result in poor balance/coordination, unsteady gait and mobility which tends to
ﬂuctuate and is difﬁcult to predict In view of his hemophilia, a risk of a fall may be more
detrimental to [Student] than another child of his neurologie status.” These physicians have
recommended out of district placements for the Student because they believe that the inadequate
care of the School District was the cause of the two falls. [P~36; P—37]

Subsequent to this accident, the School reassigned the paraprofessional. The Parents retained
counsel. The Director of Special Services summarized expectations for increased staff training
by the School Physical Therapist. The School’s plan was to continue to allow paraprofessionals
and teachers to continue with motor skill exercise but with better training by the School Physical
Therapist. [B-22] The Preschool Paraprofessional returned to the school to be Student’s one-to—
one paraprofessional. [Testimony, Mother; Testimony, M. Zeigler] A new paraprofessional
was assigned to train with the Preschool I’araprofessionaL A summary of skills and
competencies were developed for any paraprofessional to be qualiﬁed to work with Student. A
training log was developed to record the new paraprofessional’s hours and types of training.
The Paraprofessionai was allowed to ask follow—up questions after training. One competency
was “ambulation with guided, hand held support.” [B-23]

In April of 2013, Student underwent a second surgery for removal of rods from his previous hip
surgery, In addition to this surgery, the Student also underwent a ﬁ'enectomy, a surgery to
release a tongue-tie that was recommended by the Student’s Private Speech and Language
Pathologist. Postoperatively, the Student was walking in small spurts at home. He would return
to school in a wheelchair and receive physical therapy twice a week ﬁrst with transfers and then
resuming ambulation with the Physical Therapist at school. Prior to the Student’s return, a PPT
meeting was convened to plan for Student’s return. The staff shared the training process of the
new paraprofessional with the Mother. The Mother did not agree that the paraprofessional
training was sufﬁcient and requested a physical therapist during the school day. The school—
based members of the PPT rejected this idea. [B—27]

On May 23, 2013, the school converted a Team Meeting after the Mother observed the
Student’s program. The team reported on the Student’s progress in school since his recent
surgery, The oral motor exercises that were being impiemented to carry out feeding were
discussed. The Mother expressed concerns about a lack 01‘ a feeding program for Student. The
Speech and Language Pathologist complained about the safety of the foods that were being sent
to school for the Student to eat. The Mother called attention to Depaitment of Education
guidelines for Feeding and Swallowing. The team minutes stated that the “team questioned the
school system’s role in feeding and agreed to reference the state guidelines.” This is the ﬁrst
time in the educational record that the school considers formally incorporating feeding as a pait
0fthe Student’s IEP. [P-24]

16

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

54.

55.

56.

2013 ESY and 2013-3014 School Year

On J une 13, 2013, the PPT met to conduct an annual review and to plan the Student’s 2013-
2014 IEP. The services to be received by Student were as follows: ESY recommended; PT to
consult with PE teacher 2x monthly; PT, OT, Speech and language consult 1x weekly for 30
minutes with special education teacher; full time paraprofessional suppoﬁ in all areas of the
school day; paraprofessional will attend a minimum 0f2x weekly PT sessions with [Student]
and in addition to attending PT sessions, para will consult with PT at least lX weekly for 15
minutes; Para will attend a minimum 01‘ 3x weekly speech and language sessions with [Student]
and in addition will consult with the speech and language pathologist 1x weekly for 15 minutes;
para will attend a minimum of 2x weekly OT session (1X in classroom and 1x in resource room)
with [Student] and in addition will consult with OT 1x/weekly for 15 minutes; Para will consult
with special education teacher 2x weekly for 20 minutes; regular and daily use oftablet device
to support communication and learning.

Student’s 2013—2014 IEP contained goals and objectives for toileting, physical therapy but not
feeding. The team shared the Student’s progress. Toileting objectives were discussed. The
Mother requested that a consultant be hired to support the staff in toilet training. The team
would not agree to an outside consultant but agreed to have a special education teacher from the
preschool provide guidance on the toileting plan. The team also agreed to consult with the
Student’s doctor to see how his surgeries impacted his ability to toilet. The Student’s
Pediatrician testiﬁed at the hearing that the Student’s readiness and ability to make progress on
toileting was limited prior to his surgeries. The school has had access to the pediatrician and
continued to modify the Student’s toileting plan. The Student’s toileting plan was modiﬁed on
September 19, 2013. In addition, a performance goal (#18) was added to include feeding skills
for the ﬁrst time. [B—44]

The September 2013 PPT met to review a consultation report conducted by a CREC Physical
Therapy Consultant. This had come about after the Parents ﬁled a Due Process Complaint
seeking a one~to-one physical therapist as Student’s paraprofessional. The Parents and the
Director ol‘Special Services signed the Settlement Agreement on July 3 and 8th. [B—31] The
Agreement states in pertinent part as follows:

Paragraph 1 states that “The Board agrees to contract the services ofa mutually
agreed upon physical therapy consultant. The consultant shall consult for 20 hours during
the summer 012013 The Board agrees to advise the consultant that the Parents request that
the 20 hours he delivered as 5 hours per week over 4 weeks of the Board’s extended school
year program. However, the Parents understand that the Board cannot guarantee that the
consultant will be able to provide the hours in the Parent’s requested increments. However,
if the consultant is available to do so, this is how the consult shall occur. In consideration of
the above payments, the Parents agree that they will not seek reimbursement for any
additional costs related to the Student’s educational program for the summer 01‘2013,
Parents acknowledged that they were being represented by counsel experience in the area of
the law and that the agreement had been fully explained to them by counsel.

Paragraph 5 states that “[i]n consideration for the consultant sewices agreed upon
herein, the Parents agree to waive any and all claims, known and unknown, which the
Parents 0r Student may have had against the Board, including but not limited to all claims
pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. §10~76 et seq., The Individuals With Disabilities Act, as
amended, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, The American with Disabilities Education
Act, as amended, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, The Americans with Disabilities

l7

57.

58.

59.

60.

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 1983 and The Family Education Rights and Privacy Act concerning
the educational program during the summer of 2013.
Paragraph 10 of the Settlement Agreement states that the Agreement is legally

binding and enforceable in any State Court or in a district court of the United States.
The CREC consultant observed the Student’s physical therapy program in ESY and wrote a
consultation report about her opinion as to what she obsewed during ESY 2013 and for one day
in the 2013—2014 school year to see the school environment. [Testimony, Brilla] The Board has
ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss the Parent’s Due Process claims for the ESY 2013. The Parents
oppose. For the reasons stated in the Conclusions of Law and Order below granting the Board’s
Motion to Dismiss, the Parent’s claims for ESY 2013 will not be considered.
This Hearing Ofﬁcer therefore will not consider the CREC Physical Therapy Consultant’s
testimony with regard to what she observed in ESY 2013. The CREC Physical Therapist’s
testimony is of limited probative value. The Consultant recommended the use of a gait belt, a
safety device, for use in independent ambulation. This recommendation was contrary to the
Physical Therapist’s conscious decision not to use a gait belt. [Testimony, G. Leslie;
Testimony, Bi'illa] The CREC Physical Therapy Consultant appeared nervous throughout her
testimony. This Hearing Ofﬁcer observed her continually looking to the Board’s lawyers for
reassurance during testimony. At one point in her testimony, she repeated the Board’s position
about the September fall, that there was no fall because the Student simply sat back, even
though she was not a witness to the event. When questioned by this Hearing Ofﬁcer, the
witness denied being told this by the Board’s attorney but then later referred to her
conversations with the School Physical Therapist.
Leaving credibility aside, the witness did provide some helpful testimony. In September of
2013, the Student’s Orthopedic Surgeon sent a new prescription for physical therapy to the
school, This prescription stated that the Student should receive gait training with “PT 01' PT
aide” two times a day, [P—72] The Physical Therapist testiﬁed that she was not available
everyday because she only worked part time at BES. She delegated the gait training to the
Student’s paraprofessional. The Director of Special Services also testiﬁed that she reviewed the
prescription with the Physical Therapist and was told by the Physical Therapist that there was no
need to contact the prescribing doctor. [Testhnony, G. Leslie; Testimony, K. Culkin] The
CREC Physical Therapy Consultant testiﬁed that she would have had to call the doctor to clarify
what he meant by the prescription before conducting any physical therapy. [Testimony, Brilla].
As of the time of the hearing, the Student’s classroom paraprofessional continues to participate
in the independent ambulation of the Student with a gait belt. It is unclear whether the
paraprofessional engages in the practice of “hands off guided walking” with the Student. The
previously described falls risked the Student’s safety and seriously interfered with the Student’s
ability to access his educational program. Falls not only posed a danger to Student’s health but
in the aftermath of a fall, time has been taken away from the educational program to tend to the
Student’s well being and revisit changes in procedures. Student has had to be excused from
school and seen by doctors to be assured that he was not seriously injured. The manner through
which related services are delivered cannot be the subject of continual experimentations,
especially when it draws vigorous objection from prescribing doctors and other treating
physicians who know the Student best.

18

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order l4-0276

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:
Board Malian to Dismiss Claims in ESY 2013

The Board’s Motion to Dismiss the Parent claims for ESY 2013 is GRANTED because the parties
entered into a Settlement Agreement. The Hearing Ofﬁcer does not have jurisdiction to determine
whether the agreement is enforceable 0r valid. §10—76h of the Connecticut General Statutes
conﬁnes the jurisdiction of Hearing Ofﬁcers to conﬁrming, modifying or rejecting the
identification, evaluation or educational placement of or the provision ofFAPE to a child, to
determining the appropriateness of a unilateral placement of a child or to prescribing alternative
special education programs for a child. The proper forum for the enforceability or determination of
the validity of the Settlement Agreement is a state 01‘ federal court. [13-31]

2011-2012; ESY 2012; 2012-2013 (01(12013—2014 Programs

1. There is no dispute that Student is eligible to receive a free and appropriate public education
(F APE) and related services as set forth in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA), 20 U.S.C Sec 1401, et seq and its implementing regulations codiﬁed at 34 CFR §300
et. Seq., and under Conn. Gen. Stat. Sec. 10-76.

2. The purpose of the IDEA is to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them
FAPE that emphasizes “special education and related services designed to meet their unique
needs” and “prepare them for further education, employment and independent living” and “to
ensure that the rights of children with disabilities and parents of such children are protected. i.”
20 U.S,C. §l400(d)(l).

3. The Act deﬁnes FAPE as special education and related services which “(A) have been provided
at public expense, under public supervision and direction, and without charge; (B) meet the
standards of the State Educational Agency; (C) include an appropriate preschool, elementary, or
secondary school education in the State involved; and (D) are provided in conformity with the
individualized education program required under Sec. 614(d).” 20 U.S.C. §1401 (8).

4. The Board has the burden ol‘proving the appropriateness of the Student’s program and
placement, which burden shall be met by a preponderance of the evidence Regulation of
Connecticut State Agencies (R.C.S.A.) Sec 10-76h-l4.

5. The standard for determining whether a Board has provided a free appropriate public education
is set forth as a two-part inquiry in Board ofEducalion ofrhe Hendrick Hudson Central School
District v Rowley, 458 U S 176(1982). The ﬁrst question to be determined is whether the Board
complied with the procedural requirements ofthe Act? The second question to be determined is
whether the Individualized Educational Program is "reasonably calculated to enable the child to
receive educational beneﬁts?” Rowley, 458 U S at 206-207

6. Addressing the ﬁrst prong of the Rowley inquiry, the initial procedural inquiry is not a
formality. As the Supreme Court noted in Rowley, Congress’s emphasis in the IDEA “upon the
full participation Ofconcei'ned parties throughout the development of the IEP,” together with the
requirement for federal approval of state and local plans, reﬂects a “conviction that adequate
compliance with the procedures prescribed would in most cases assure much if not all of what
Congress wished in the way of a substantive content in an IEP.” 458 US at 206. " Walczak v
Florida Union Free School District, 27 LDELR l 135 (2d Cir 1998). The procedural guidelines
of the IDEA are designed to guarantee that the education ol‘each child with disabilities are
tailored to meet the child’s unique needs and abilities. 20 U.S.C. § 1412 and 1415. These

19

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

procedural guarantees are procedural safeguards against arbitrary and erroneous decision-
making. Daniel RR, v State Board QfEducalion, 874 FM 1036, 1041 (5‘h Cir. 1989).
Compliance with the IDEA’s procedural requirements is the responsibility ot‘the board and not
the parents. Uniﬁed Sch. Dist V Dept. Qf'Ed, 64 Conn. App 2731 285 (2001). However, a
procedural violation of the IDEA does not, in and of itself, warrant a change in the child’s
educational placement. In order to conclude that procedural vioIations resulted in a denial ol‘a
free appropriate public education, the parent must show that the procedural errors resulted in a
ioss ofeducational opportunity. See Burke County Bd. ()fEduc. v. Demon, 895 F.2d 973, 982
(4th Cir. 1999); Evans v. District N0. 17) 841 F.2d 824, 830 (8"1 Cir. 1988). Procedural ﬂaws do
not automatically require the Hearing Ofﬁcer to ﬁnd that a denial of FAPE has occurred,
instead, the hearing ofﬁcer must determine if the procedural inadequacies resulted in the “loss of
educational opportunities or seriously infringed upon the parent’s opportunity to palticipate in
formulating the [IEP]...” Procedural violations that interfere with parental participation in the
IEP formulation process undermine the ver essence of the IDEA. Amanda J. ex rel Annette J.
v. Clark County Sch Dist. 267 F.3d 877 (9u Cir. 2001). An IEP addresses the unique needs of
the child and cannot be developed if those people most familiar with the child’s needs are not
involved or fully informed. IDEA expects strong participation at PPT meetings. Warren G. v.
Cmnberland Counly Sch. Dist. 190 F.3d. 80 (3d Cir. 1993). The IEP is to be a collaborative
process developed by the parents of the student, educators and other specialists. Haenig v. Doe
484 US 305, 311 (1988).

7. Here, the first prong of Rowley, whether the Board complied with procedural requirements, was
not met. First, the IDEA requires schools to assess children “in all areas of suspected disability”
and the assessments shall provide relevant information to determine the child’s educational
needs. 20 U.S.C. §1414(b)(3). The Board was presented with an oral motor evaluation by the
Parent calling attention to Student’s motor deﬁcits and physical disabilities in feeding at a
February 2012 PPT, but failed to conduct a comprehensive feeding and swaliowing evaluation.
In fact, Board staff refused to recognize its obligations to evaluate and program for Student’s
feeding disabilities as late as May 2013. The failure to evaluate and program for this oral motor
disability in feeding resulted in the loss of educational opportunities for Student. Second, the
Board conducted a “trial experiment” employing classroom paraprofessionals to conduct “hands
off guided walking” without first discussing this with Parents at any previous PPT or allowing
Parent to have input. Although the Student’s IEP contained objectives for independent
ambulation, the Parent was not informed that classroom paraprofessionals would be
patticipating in hands off ambulation and, if informed, would have been able to object. The IEP
described the Paraprofessional’s role as “safety and assistance with self help skills and academic
support.” Central to the procedural safeguards is the process of developing the IEP. The
Parents were denied the opportunity to fully participate in the development of the goals and
objectives for independent ambulation. 20 U.S.Ct §1401(a). [ B-16; Findings of Fact No. 20—22;
48 J

8. As to the second inquiry of whether the IEPs were reasonably calculated to enable the child to
receive educational beneﬁts, the IDEA does not itself articulate any speciﬁc level of educational
beneﬁts that must be provided through an IEP. The Supreme Court, however, has specifically
rejected the contention that the "appropriate education" mandated by IDEA requires states to
"maximize the potential of handicapped children " Walczak v F lor'ida Union Free School
District, 27 [DELR 1 135 (2d Cir 1998), citing Rowley, supra; KP v Juzwic, 891 F Supp 703, 71
8 (D Conn 1995). The IDEA requires ”the door ot‘public education [to] he opened for a disabled
child in a ”meaningful' way.” Walczak, 142 F.3d at 130. However, it does not guarantee

20

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14-0276

10.

ll.

12.

"everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents.” Id. at 132.
An appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress, not
regression. Id. Whether the program is "individualized on the basis of the student's assessment
and performance” is also considered when determining the appropriateness of an 1131’. See AS
v, Board qf'EducaIion of West Hartford, 35 IDELR 179 (D. Conn. 2001), aﬂ’d, 47 Fed. Appx.
615 (2d Cir, 2002) (citingMC. ex rel Mrs, C. v. Voluntown Rd. quduc., 122 F,Supp.2d 289,
292 11.6 (D. Conn. 2000). The Student’s program was not individualized on the basis of the
student’s 1‘ unctional status and did not meet the unique needs of Student in the following ways:
The Student was not provided with appropriate programs for the 2012-2013 and 2013—2014
school years because the Board did not include the Student’s physician’s input and Student’s
functional status that impacted his educational program. [Finding of Fact Not 49]
The Student was not provided appropriate programs for the 201 1-2012; ESY 2012; 2012-2013
and 2013—2014 school years because Student’s IEPs did not include feeding as a related service.
In addition, there was no plan developed to provide feeding services for Student so that Student
could safely receive proper nutrition State of Connecticut Guidelinesfbr F ceding and
Swallowing Services create a template to follow to address the complex needs of Students with
feeding and swallowing disorders. The guidelines recommend the use of a feeding plan.
Properly implemented, the Student should have been able to easily access the nutrition
necessary to access his educational program and progress in feeding and swallowing. The
Feeding Plan should have included a multidisciplinary group of professionals, including the
nurse, the Student’s physician, the School District medical adviser, private speech and language
pathologists, teachers and nutritionists among others to determine the Student’s unique needs for
feeding, and, made nutritional food options available to Student so that the Student could access
his educational program. As a result of this failure to address this necessary related service, the
staff was confused and unable to determine what to safely feed the Student at different times
and refused to feed the Student food that was previously approved by the Student’s private
speech and language pathologist. Additionally, the school put the responsibility on the Parent to
provide food and nutrition for the Student while he was attending school when this would
normally not be the case for nondisabled peers. The school had no menu developed for the
Student to obtain proper nutrition to access his school program. These are clear denials oi~
FAPE. [Findings ofFact No. 6, 21, 22, 30, 53, and 55]
The Physical Therapy program in 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 did not meet the unique needs of
the Student and interfered with the Student’s ability to access his education. Further, the
Physical Therapist lacked basic judgment in developing her program by not consulting with the
Student’s doctors. She did not follow Connecticut Department Q/‘Education Physical Therapy
Guidelines (Guidelines). First, the Guidelines state “teams need to consult with the prescribing
doctor to develop appropriate goals.” Guidelines; p. 26. The Student’s physical therapy
program was not developed with any input from the prescribing doctors. Second, state
Guidelines require physical therapists to consult and collaborate with the school medical adviser
and the student’s physician in the planning, providing, and evaluating of health-related services
for students with actual and potential health problems. The Guidelines state that consultation
with these medical doctors “must be done, as much as possible, in collaboration with the school
nurse and other school health professionals sewing the student.” The Student’s physical therapy
program was not developed in collaboration with the Student’s prescribing physician. Student’s
physical therapist not only failed to consult 0r collaborate with the Student’s physicians in
planning the physical therapy program, but ignored a doctor’s order for gait training with a
physical therapist or physical therapy aide by delegating the therapy to a classroom

21

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

13‘

14.

paraprofessional, [Findings ofFact N0. 59] Third, the Guidelines deﬁne physical therapy
interventions in school to be conducted by physical therapists to include “motor skill practice”.
Guidelines p. 47. Physical Therapists and Physical Therapy Assistants (PTAs) are licensed by
the Department of Public Health under the Connecticut Physical Therapy Practice Act, Conn
Gen. Stat. Section 20-66 and are the only persons licensed to perform physical therapy
interventions, including rehabilitative exercises. The delegation of motor skill practice, such as
“hands off guided walking” and gait training to a classroom paraprofessional is antithetical to
the Connecticut Department quducation Physical Therapy Guidelines. Fourth, the delegation
of physical therapy exercises to a classroom paraprofessional is inappropriate because the
Connecticut Depaitment of Education Guidelinesfor Training and Support of
Paraprofessionals (2012) specifically describe “Physical Therapy Assistants” to be the type of
paraprofessional to assist physical therapists in delivering physical therapy sewices. Finally, the
School Physical Therapist testiﬁed that the motor skills practice was performed in the Resource
Room and that the paraprofessional was supervised by other certiﬁed staff when the School
Physical Therapist was not in the building. [Finding of Fact N0. 59] The delegation of
supervision of the classroom paraprofessional to a Special Education Teacher while the
classroom paraprofessional is providing related services to the Student violates R.C.S.A. 10.
76d—2(a)i The regulation requires direct supewision of each aide who is assisting in the
provision of related services by a person ceitiﬂed or licensed in the area of specialization to
which the aide is assigned. Direct supewision requires that the aide work in close proximity to
the related service personnel. The aide was not in close proximity to the Physical Therapist who
was not in the building. In addition, as set forth in the F inding of Facts above, the Student’s
paraprofessionals (lid not receive adequate training. All these failures to properly implement
physical therapy services seriously interfered with the Student’s access to his educational
program. This is a clear denial of FAPE. [Findings of Fact No 33, 35, 40, 47, 48, 59, 60]
Student’s toileting program was appropriate. The evidence supports a conclusion that the
Student was not physically or developmentally able to begin toileting until his recovery from
surgery. Since beginning the toilet training program, he has made steady progress. [Findings of
Fact No. 49, 50]

In addition to the free appropriate public education requirement, the IDEA preference is for
disabled children to be educated in the least restrictive environment capable of meeting their
needs. Walczak, supra. IDEA sets forth a strong congressional preference for integrating
children with disabilities in the regular classrooms Oberti v Board QfEa’ucation, 995 F 2d 1204
(3d Cir 1993). The Act's least restrictive environment requirement is met when the child with a
disabiiity is educated in the regular classroom, or when the child who cannot be fully included is
mainstreamcd t0 the "maximum extent possible." Oberti, 995 F 2d at 1217. There is no
evidence to suggest that the Student camiot be educated at BES with supplemental aids and
related services that are administered properly‘ Further, there was not sufﬁcient evidence that
ACES could provide an appropriate program to meet the unique needs 01‘ the Student.
Therefore, the proper placement for Student is at BBS with appropriately provided related
serVices.

22

July 15, 2014 Final Decision and Order 14—0276

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

b)

The Board did not provide appropriate programs for the 201 1-2012, ESY 2012, 2012-2013 and
2013— 2014 school years.

ACES is not an appropriate placement for Student

The Board is not required to ﬁnancially support Student’s placement at ACES.

The Board shall issue a notice to convene a PPT within 15 days of receipt of this Final Decision
and Order. The PPT will invite the Student’s pediatrician, orthopedic surgeon 01‘ their
representative, private speech and language pathologists and private physical therapists to
participate in the PPT. Patticipation by the medical doctors may be by telephone. The PPT may
be continued as necessaiy to include information and perspectives from all outside private
providers. The Board shall pay the fees for the consultation of these providers. The purpose of
the PPT will be to revise the Student’s IEP, taking into account Student’s medical history and
functioning and any modiﬁcations or accommodations as will be necessary for Student to access
his educational program.

The Board shall hire a qualiﬁed and experienced consultant, who is acceptable to the Parents, to
develop a feeding plan for the Student following the State Feeding and Swallowing Guidelines.
This plan should incorporate multidisciplinary team information, including a school nutritionist,
the school district medical advisor and the Student’s physicians and the Student’s private speech
and language pathologist. The Board will pay the fees for the Student’s physicians and private
speech and language pathologist in the consultations. The Board may choose, but is not
obligated to choose, the Parent’s private speech and language pathologist. The selection of this
consultant will be completed within 60 days ofi'eceipt of this Final Decision and Order.

The Board shall hire a qualiﬁed and experienced consultant, upon the recommendation of the
Student’s Orthopedic Surgeon’s ofﬁce and who is acceptable to the Parents. This Physical
Therapy consultant may be, but is not required to be, a person that the Parent has already
identiﬁed to conduct an independent educational evaluation ol‘the School’s program. This
consultant will work with the Student’s Oithopedic Surgeon’s ofﬁce to develop a physical
therapy plan for Student to be recommended to the PPT. The Board shall pay any charges by
the Oithopedic Surgeon’s ofﬁce for this consultation. The selection of this consultant shall be
completed within 90 days of the receipt ot‘this Final Decision and Order.

The Board shall maintain a licensed physical therapist on premises at all times Student attends
school.

When ambulating or performing physical therapy exercises, the Student must be under the
supervision of a licensed physical therapist, or a physical therapy assistant working under the
supervision ofa licensed physical therapist who is in close proximity to the physical therapy
assistant. This Order will remain in effect until the earlier of either (1) the date by which the
prescribing physician (Orthopedic Surgeon) determines that the Student may safely ambulate
independently or (2) the date on which the PPT convenes to plan for the 2015-2016 school
year.

The Board shall provide the Student with two paraprofessionals so that one will sewe as a
backup for the other. Any classroom paraprofessional working with the Student must receive an
appropriate safety course equivalent to that provided to a nurse’s aide or a physical therapy aide
at a rehabilitation facility or at ACES Village to be determined by the Student’s Pediatrician.

23

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescn'ption of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

k/e/m

 

 

 

He’ariné/Ofﬁcer Signature
SYIVia Ho
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 I

 

