F ebruary 3, 2015 ‘ _ Final Decision and Order 15-0251

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Bridgeport Board of Education V. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Gwen Zittoun
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: V Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Were the evaluations performed by the Board appropriate? If so ;
2. Is the Parent entitled to an independent educational eva1uation (IEE) in the area of

reading?
SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Emotional Disturbance and is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et
seq. This was an expedited hearing.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent rej ected the evaluations performed
by the Board. The Parent requested an independent educational evaluation (TEE) in the area of
reading. The Board refused the Parent’s request and the Board ﬁled for due process. The parties
agreed to mediate the matter. The date of the mediation session was January 20, 2015.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on December 1, 2014 and a pre-hearing conference
Was held on December 10, 2014. A hearing date of J antu 29, 2015 was chosen by the parties.

At the mediation session the palties were able to come to a resolution of the matter. On J anuary
20, 2015, in an electronic transmission, the Board advised the hearing ofﬁcer the matter was

being withdrawn without prejudice. The Parent did not obj ect to the request. The Withdrawal
was granted. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is F ebruary 9, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription 0fthe hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 
  

Hearing OffTe7‘375iguauue

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

