March 9, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15—03 13

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Thomaston Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Sun'ogate Parent: Pro Se
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attomey Craig Meuser
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001
Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the Student’s behavior a manifestation of his disability? If not;
2. Is maintaining the Student’s current placement substantially 1ike1y to result in injury
to the Student or to others?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Emotional Disturbance and is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C1 §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et
seq. This was an expedited hearing. At a p1anning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the
Surrogate Parent rejected the ﬁnding that the Student’s behavior was not a manifestation of his
disability. The Surrogate Parent requested that the Student be returned to the placement from
which he was removed. The Board refused the Parent’s request.

On January 28, 2015, the Board received notice of the Surrogate Parent’s request for due
process. The parties agreed to a resolution session. The date of the resolution session was
February 11, 2015. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on January 28, 2015, the hearing
officer recused herself. This hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on J anuaiy 28, 2015. A pre—hearing
conference was held on February 2, 2015. Hearing dates of F ebruary 26 and 27, 2015 were
chosen by the parties.

In an electronic transmission, the Surrogate Parent advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the Student
was relocating to another state and he was withdrawing the due process request. The Board did
not object. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is March 13, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
com“: by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 
  

Hearing Ofﬁé’ErlSiguatme

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

