September 4, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0611

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Bolton Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces of J ennifer Laviano
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Is the Board of Education’s evaluation of the Student in the areas of psychology, speech & language
and/or transition appropriate?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board of Education requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter
on June 23, 2015. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case on June 24, 2015. A
telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on J uly 14, 2015. The Student’s parent and advocate
appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Linda Yoder appeared on behalf of the Board of
Education. At that time, a hearing date of August 13, 2015 was scheduled, and the deadline for ﬁling
the ﬁnal decision and order was identiﬁed as August 7, 2015. Subsequently, Attorney Laviano entered
the case on behalf of the Student.

On J uly 30, 2015, the Board of Education reported that the parties had participated in mediation and
were working on a settlement agreement. The Board of Education requested a thirty-day postponement
and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in this case to
September 4, 2015. The purpose of the requested postponement and extension was to allow the parties
to pursue a tentative settlement in principal reached at mediation. The postponement was granted.

On September 2, 2015, the Board of Education reported that the parties had resolved their dispute, and
requested that the case be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings 01' prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@FW

Hearing OfﬁEEr Signature

HMJFKIKB

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

