August 21, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15—0029

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Danbury Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on beha1f of the Parent: Attomey Meredith Braxton
Meredith C. Braxton, Esq. LLC
280 Railroad Avenue, Suite 205
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Julie F ay
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Robert L. Ske11ey, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

A preheating conference had not yet occurred in this matter, however, based on the
request for a due process hearing by the Danbury Board of Education (“Board”), the
issues listed on the complaint were:

1. Are the Parents entitled to request an independent educational evaluation (“IEE”) if the
evaluator was mutually agreed upon by the Parents and the Board?

2. If the Parents are entitled to request an IEE, was the evaluation in question appropriate
and sufﬁcient to fulﬁll the Board’s obligations under the IDEIA?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board ﬁled the request for a due process hearing on July 14, 2014. A preheating
conference was schedu1ed for August 26, 2014. The Board made it known that they were
willing to work collaborative1y with the Parents to resolve the issues. Subsequently, on
August 19, 2014, Counsel for the Board, through email, notiﬁed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that
a fully executed settlement agreement had been achieved and that the Board was
withdrawing the request for due process hearing with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The Board has requested that this matter be withdrawn with prejudice. With no further
issues to be decided, this matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

4 If rhc local orregional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for '

providing Special education for the student requiu'ng special education does not‘ take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁce: within ﬁfteen days aﬁcr
receipt'tbereoﬁ the State Board odeucaﬁon shall take appropriate action to enforco the
findings orpz'escriptiod ofthe heaﬂng oﬁﬁccr.

Appeals from the beaming decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to, state or fcdéral
count by cithcrpmy in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and T me 20, United States Codc 1425(1‘)(2)(A). . 4

  

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signahzre

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

 

