March 31, 2015 F inal Decision and Order 15-0367

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

StudentI v. Fairﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Michael Gilberg
Attorney Jennifer Laviano
Law Ofﬁces of J ennifer LaViano LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Michele Laubin
Berchem Moses & Devlin PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: J anis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Board of
Education’s (“BOE’S”) Attorney via Letter dated February 19, 2015.2 The deadline to mail the
ﬁnal decision and order is April 5.

The issues in the case are identiﬁed as:

1. Is Board of Education’s October 2014 evaluation of Student appropriate?

2. If not, are Student’s Parents entitled to an Independent Educational Evaluation at

public expense?

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was scheduled for March 9 then rescheduled to March 17 at
the request of the parties. Twenty minutes prior to the scheduled preheating conference,
Student’s Attorney requested that the conference be postponed due to last minute unforeseen
circumstances. The pre—hearing conference was rescheduled to March 24.

Via e-mai1 dated March 23, Student’s Attorney indicated that she was authorized to withdraw
Student’s Parent’s request for an Independent Educational Evaluation (“IEE”). BOE’s Attorney
responded that, in light of the withdrawal of the request for IEE, BOE withdraws the due process

hearing request.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the ahove-captioned case is dismissed.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student”,
“Parents", “School” and titles of school staff members and certain other witnesses in place of names and other
personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2015 uniess otherwise indicated.

 

' ‘ v'.
‘ ifthq local or regional board ofcducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
‘ . 'Rroviding spacial education for the student requiring spcéial education does not take

action 01:1 the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁcr
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educanon shall take approprifxtc action to enforce the

ﬁndings or- prescription of the hearing ofﬁccr.

. Appeals ﬁom the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may bemade to state 01' federal
coun by either party in accprdancc with the provisidns of Section 4-183, Connccticut
Gcngral Statutes, and Title 20 United States'Code 1415 (i)(2)(A)..

 

;cari1mg Ofﬁcer Signature

SPVN \s c. .3511ij

. Hcéﬁng Ofﬁcer Name iuPrint _

signpagc. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

