May 26, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0441

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Enﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Guardian: Catherine Cushman, Esq.
Connecticut Legal Services
P. O. Box 258
Willimantic, CT 06226

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine L. Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
30 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the exiting of the Student from special education and related services as deﬁned in the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) appropriate? If not;

2. Was the program provided by the Board for the 2014-2015 school year appropriate and did
it provide the student with a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive
environment (LRE)?

3. Should the Board conduct an Independent Educational Evaluation (IEE) at public expense
to address conﬂicting ﬁndings regarding the Student’s academic, behavioral, social and emotional
levels of achievement and performance?

4. Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of a free and appropriate
public education?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

' The Student is not identiﬁed as entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities
Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et
seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Guardian stated that the Board improperly
exited the Student from special education and related services and requested that he continue to be found
eligible. The Board denied the Guardian’s request and the Guardian requested a due process hearing. The
Board received notice of the request for a due process hearing on April 7, 2015. An impartial hearing
ofﬁcer was appointed on April 8, 2105 and a pre-hearing conference was scheduled for April 14, 2015.

The parties agreed to mediation rather than a resolution meeting and also agreed to May 19 and 20, 2015
as hearing dates. In an electronic transmission, the Guardian’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the
Student no longer resided in the district and requested that the matter be withdrawn without prejudice; the
Board did not object. The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order is June 19, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hean'ng ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either palty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

   

 

  

. _ ,4;

’ «’ \£ 1/
Hearing OftTe/EESi‘gnamre
‘Justino Rosado

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

