December 11, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15—0133

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Fairﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attomey Gerry McMahon
The Law Ofﬁces of Gerry McMahon, LLC
98 Mill Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Megan Buxton
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.

78 Broad Street
Milford, CT

Appearing before: Attorney Am F . Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education offer the Student at free appropriate public education for
the 2014-15 School Year?

a. If not, is the alternative school an appropriate placement in the least restrictive
environment?

2. If the Board of Education did not offer the Student a free appropriate public
education, and the alternative school is not appropriate, what is an appropriate
placement in the least restrictive environment?

PRO CEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education hearing in the above—captioned matter on
September 8, 2014. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on
September 9, 2014. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was conducted on September 29,
2014. Attorney Gerry McMahon appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Megan
Buxton appeared on behalf of the Fairﬁeld Board of Education. Evidentiary hearings were
scheduled for December 9 and December 11, 2014. It was also established that the deadline
for completing the hearings and ﬁling the ﬁnal decision was November 20, 2014.

On September 26, 2014, Counsel for the Student submitted a written request for a thirty-day
postponement and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal
decision in this case to December 19, 2014. The purpose of the requested postponement and
extension was to allow the parties time to seek a resolution of the dispute. Counsel for the
Board of Education agreed to the requested postponement and it was granted.

 

December 11, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15-0133

On November 25, 2014, the Student reported that the parties reached a mutual agreement
and requested that the matter be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
own by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬂmﬁw

Hearing Oﬁicer Signature

ﬂijEVRD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

