July 14, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0487

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Barkhamsted Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Were the evaluations conducted by the District appropriate, thereby relieving the District of the
obligation to fund the following Independent Educational Evaluations (“IEEs”) requested by Parent at
District expense:

Literacy/Numeracy Evaluation

Assistive Technology Evaluation

Functional Behavioral Assessment

Central Auditory Processing Evaluation

Speech and Language Evaluation

Occupational The1apy Evaluation?

2. Was Parents‘ 1equest to have D1. Ciocca obse1ve the Student for an entile day a request f01 a new
Independent Educational Evaluation, and as such to be included 1n the list of lEEs 1equested by Parents
set forth under Issue 1, 01' not?

3. Did the District commit a substantive or procedural Violation of the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act by not agreeing to have Dr. Ciocca observe Student in the District’s educational setting
for a full day at District expense?

”9999‘.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On May 14, 2015, the Parents received a Special Education Due Process Hearing Request, and the
undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned on May 13, 2015. During the Prehearing Conference held on
May 28, 2015, a hearing date of July 14, 2015 was set and the deadline for the mailing of the Final
Decision and Order was established as June 26, 2015. A request for extension of the mailing deadline to
allow the parties to engage in settlement discussions and to accommodate the scheduled hearing date
was made during the prehearing conference. After a consideration of all of the relevant factors, this
request was granted. The new deadline for the ﬁling of the Final Decision and Order was established as
July 24, 2015. On July 8, 2015, Attorney for the Board sent a letter to the Hearing Ofﬁcer indicating the
Board was withdrawing its Special Education Due Process Hearing request.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after ‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
fmdjngs or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

EWW éﬁ/é

/Hearing Ofﬁcer Signamre

B/at‘l’é H. (7:1L ton

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

