F ebruary 24, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0268

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Parents, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Julie Fay
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

This matter was withdrawn prior to the prehearing conference which was scheduled
February 24, 2015.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

This matter was ﬁled by the Parents on December 11, 2014. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
originally assigned to this case determined that there was a conﬂict of interest and
recused herself from the matter. It was subsequently assigned to the undersigned Hearing
Ofﬁcer. A prehearing conference was scheduled for January 9, 2015 (due to holiday
schedules and the unavailability of the parties). Due to personal issues for the Parents,
the original preheating conference was moved to F ebruary 23, 2015, with a request to the
Parties to extend the ﬁnal decision and order date. On February 20, 2015 the Parents
withdrew the complaint without prejudice, with the intent of reﬁling after amending the
complaint.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

With the withdrawal of the complaint by the Parents on February 20, 2015 and with no
further issues to be decided, this matter is DISMISSED, without prejudice.

 

, If the local orregionaJ board ofeducaﬂon or the uniﬁed school district responsible for '

providing Special education for ﬂu: student requixing special education does not take
action on tho ﬁndixygs or prescription of the. hearing ofﬁce: within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
rcceipt'tbereof, the State Bbard odeucaﬂon shall take appropriate action to enfoxco tho
findizggs or pxhscriptlod ofﬂme hearlng ofﬁcer. .

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may [:6 made to. state or fcdéral
court by citbcr‘pmy in accordance with the provisions of Scction 4-183, Cennecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Codc 1415(1')(2)(A). . , ‘

Hearing Oﬁicerﬁignafurc 0

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

 

