December 22, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15-0248

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Bolton Board of Education-v. Parents

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Andrew Feinstein
Attorney at Law, LLC
86 Denison Avenue
Mystic, CT 06355

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Was the multi-disciplinary evaluation and other testing conducted by the District’s staff
appropriate, thereby relieving the District of the obligation to grant Parents’ request for an
Independent Educational Evaluation? -

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On November 25, 2014, Parents received a request for a Special Education Due Process Hearing.
A preheaxing conference was scheduled for December 12, 2014. On December 11, 2014,
Attorney for the Parents informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that he had been retained by the Parents
and requested a postponement of the preheating conference due to his unavailability on
December 12, 2014. The prehearing conference was postponed with a new date to be identiﬁed
by Counsel the following week. Before a new date for the prehearing conference could be
determined, the parties reached an agreement, and on December 19, 2014 Attorney for the Board
withdrew its request for a Special Education Due Process Hearing.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed School distn'ct responsible for
providing special education for the student requin'ng special education does not take
action 011 the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

£/%//mﬂé

/Hea1ing Ofﬁcer Signature

3ch Hr FHO'A

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

