June 30, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0438

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student1 V. Westport Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Lawrence Berliner
Law Ofﬁce of Lawrence Berliner LLC
1720 Post Road East Suite 214B
Westport, CT 06880

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem Moses & Devlin PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: J anis C. Jerman, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney via

Letter dated April 2, 2015.2 It was received by the Board of Education (“BOB”) on April 2. The 30-day

resolution period ended May 2 and the original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was June

16. A telephonic pre—hearing conference was held on April 24. Attorney Berliner appeared on behalf of

Student and Attorney Moses appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education during the
2013—14 school year?

2. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education during the

2014-15 school year?

Did the Board of Education timely and appropriately evaluate Student?

If the answer to Issues One, Two, or Three above are in the negative, what shall be the remedy?

Are Student’s Parents entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Cashman’s evaluation of Student?

Should Student be placed at Winston Preparatory School at the Board of Education’s expense?

Qwew

Via e-mail dated April 30, Student’s Attorney requested an extension of the mailing date to allow the
paities to schedule hearing dates in J une. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request
was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until July 15, 2015.

The parties were scheduled for a resolution session on May 4. Hearing was scheduled for June 25. On
June 23, Student’s Attorney indicated Via email that the parties ﬁnalized a settlement agreement and
withdrew Student’s due process request with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed with prejudice.

I In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20
U,S.C, § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student”> “Parents”, “School” and
titles of school staff members and ceitain other witnesses in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.
2 All dates are 2015 unless otherwise indicated. _

 

r
, l
. 4‘

. ' ifthc local or regional boﬁd of education 01’ the uniﬁed school aistﬁct responsible for

' ,“Rroyi'ding spacial "education for the student requin'ng speéial education does not take
action on the ﬁndmgs or prescription of the hearing ofﬁce: within ﬁﬁccn days aﬁm- _
rcceipt thereof, the State Board of Educanon shall take appropﬁ_a(c action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prcscription of the hearing ofﬁccr.

. Appeals ﬁom the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
court by either party in accprdancc with the provisio'ns of Section 4-183, Connecticut
Gangral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

wring. aring Ofﬁcer Signature

GPVN is c. ,{sazmivw

. Heén'ng Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04. .,

 

 

