October 7, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0559

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Hartford Board of Education

Appearing on beha1f of the Surrogate Parent: Attorney Aida Arus
Law Ofﬁce of Aida Arus
255 Main Street
Hartford, CT 06106

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey
Kainen, Escalera and McHale, PC.
21 Oak Street
Hartford, CT 06106

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board violate “child ﬁnd” by not evaluating the Student in all suspect areas of
disability in a timely manner? If so;

2. Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of a free and
appropriate public education (FAPE)?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as eligible to receive FAPE as deﬁned in the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Surrogate Parent
rejected the determination that the Student was not eligible for special education and related
services and requested he be identiﬁed as eligible; the Board refused the request.

On June 5, 2015, the Board received notice of the Surrogate Parent’s request for due process. An
impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 5, 2015 and a pre-hearing conference was held on
June 10, 2015. A hearing date of J uly 30, 2015 was chosen by the parties. The parties agreed to go
to mediation in place of a resolution meeting. The hearing date was cancelled to accommodate the
mediation which was held on September 28, 2015. In an electronic transmission, the Board’s
attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the parties had resolved the issues. On October 6, 2015, the
Surrogate Parent’s attorney withdrew the matter; the withdrawal was granted. The date for the
mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the parties’ mediation. The
date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order is October 16, 2015‘

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requhing special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereqf, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

  
  
  

  

V l \1_ \
Hearing OfﬁceNLSignamre

‘Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

