October 5, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0631

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Monroe Board of Education V. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Were the psychoeducational and educational evaluations conducted by District staff appropriate,
thereby relieving the District of an obligation to obtain an Independent Educational Evaluation at
public expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On June 26, 2015, the Student received a Special Education Due Process Hearing Request ﬁled
by Board. The undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on June 30, 2015. During the
preheating conference held on July 22, 2015, a hearing date of October 5, 2015 was set and the
deadline for mailing the Final Decision and Order was established as August 10, 2015. During
the conference, the Parties agreed to request an extension of the mailing deadline to
accommodate the hearing date schedule and to allow the parties to engage in settlement
negotiations. This request was granted and September 9, 2015 was established as the new
mailing deadline. On September 8, 2015, the Parties agreed to request an extension of the
mailing deadline to accommodate the scheduled hearing date, and after a consideration of all of
the relevant factors, this request was granted and a new deadline of October 9, 2015 was
established. On October 1, 2015, in response to an email from Attorney for the Parents
indicating that the Parents were withdrawing their request for an Independent Educational
Evaluation, the Attorney for the Board sent an email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer in which she
indicated that the Board was withdrawing its request for a Special Education Due Process
Hearing.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:-

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

62/1 MN

“Healing Ofﬁcel Signature

BWaka H. F(t'tv'n

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

