February 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0264

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student East Hartford Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Surrogate Parent: Attorney Kevin Coles
Coles, Ba1dwin & Kaiser, LLC
126 Post Road, 15‘ F1.
Fairﬁeld, CT 06824

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution P1aza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:
Does the Student require one-on-one individual instruction in a Wilson Program?
SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Intellectual Disability and is entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned
in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and p1acement team (PPT) meeting, the
Surrogate Parent rejected the discontinuance of the Wilson Program for the Student. The Surrogate
Parent requested continuance of the Wilson Program. The Board refused the Surrogate Parent’s
request.

On December 8, 2014, the Board received notice of the Surrogate Parent’s request for due process.
The parties agreed to go to mediation in place of a resolution meeting. The mediation session was
scheduled for December 18, 2014. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on December 8, 2014
and a pre—hearing conference was held on December 12, 2014.

In an electronic transmission, the Surrogate Parent’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the
matter had been resolved and but required additional time to memoriahze the agreement. In an
electronic transmission, the Surrogate Parent’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the agreement
had been completed but not ratiﬁed and requested that the matter be withdrawn without prejudice. The
Board did not object. The date for mai1ing the Fina1 Decision and Order is February 21, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

