July 20, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15 -0506

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Enﬁeld Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Christine Chinni, Esq.
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Student’s 2014-2015 IEP provide the speech and language services required to provide a
free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive environment (LRE)? If not;
2. Should the Board reimburse the Patent for the cost of private speech and language sewices?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Speech and Language Impaired and is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education in the least restrictive environment as deﬁned in the Individuals With
Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent rejected the speech
and language sewices offered by the Board. The Parent requested reimbursement for the speech and
1anguage services they were providing the Student. The Board refused the Parent’s request. The parties
advised the hearing ofﬁcer that they were going to attend a resolution session. The resolution session
date was pending.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on May 12, 2015 and a pre-hearing conference was held on
May 20, 2015. A June 25, 2015 hearing date was chosen by the parties. On June 10, 2015 the Parent
requested that the hearing date be cancelled in order to complete evaluations of the Student. The request

was granted. On July 2, 2015, the Parent withdrew the request for due process. There was no objection
by the Board.

The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is July 24, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing officer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educati'on shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the healing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either paﬂy in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(1')(2)(A).

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

   
  
  

 

. " \(.
Heating Ofﬁé’BISi'guamre

‘Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Pn'nt

 

