March 16, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0302

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. New Britain Board of Education and Hartford Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney Colin M. Milne
Ofﬁce of Protection and Advocacy For
Persons with Disabilities
60B Weston Street
Hartford, CT 06120

Appearing on behalf of the New Britain Board: Attorney Alyce L. Alfano
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing on behalf of the Haitford Board: Attorney Christine L. Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Lane
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the Student’s behavior a manifestation of his disability? If not;

2. Is maintaining the Student’s current placement substantially likely to result in inj ury to the Student or to
others? If so;

3. Should the Student be returned to the placement from which he was removed?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Speciﬁc Learning Disabilities and is entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in
the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut
General Statute §10-76a et seq. This was an expedited hearing. At a planning and placement team (PPT)
meeting, the Parents rej eeted the ﬁnding that the Student’s behavior was not a manifestation of his disability.
The Parents requested that the Student be returned to the placement from which he was removed. The Board
refused the Parents’ request.

011 January 8, 2015, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. The matter had been
previously assigned to a different hearing ofﬁcer. On J anuaiy 13, 2015, a recusa1 was ﬁled by the hearing
ofﬁcer; this impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on January 13, 2015 and a pre—hearing conference was held
on J anuary 15, 2015. In an electronic transmission, the Parents” attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the
matter was being withdrawn without prejudice. The Boards did not object to the Parents’ attorney’s request. The
withdrawal was granted. The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order is March 23, 2015.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription ofthe hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereqf, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

 

 

Hearing OﬁiéESiguattlre

  

‘Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

