March 12, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0277

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Westbrook Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Patent: Attorney Andrew F einstein

Attorney At Law LLC
86 Dennison Avenue
Mystic, CT 06388

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin

Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Was the program provided by the Board for the 2014-2015 school year appropriate and did it

2.

6.
7.

provide the student with a ﬁ‘ee and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive
environment (LRE)?

Should the Board retain an independent consultant to help develop an individualized education
program (IEP) for the Student?

3. Should the Board provide the Student with one hour per day of 1 on 1 speech therapy?
4.
5. Do the school staff and the Parents require training in any assistive or augmentative

Should the Board retain an independent expert to assist in developing the triennial for the Student?

communication hardware 01' software implemented?
Is the Board performing any retaliatory action against the Parents?
Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of FAPE?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Autism and Apraxia of Speech and is entitled to receive F APE as
deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq.

and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the
Parent rejected the program offered by the Board for the 2014—201 5 school year. The Parents requested
an independent consultant to help develop the IEP and one on one speech therapy for one hour each day.
The Board denied the Parent’s request The Parent ﬁled for due process. The Board received notice on
December 19, 2014. The parties agreed to a mediate the matter.

An impattial hearing ofﬁcer Was appointed on December 18, 2014 and a pre-hearing conference was
held on December 23, 2014. A hearing date of February 12, 2015 was chosen by the parties.

 

March 12, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15—0277

On February 2, 2015, in an electronic transmission, the Boards attomey advised the hearing ofﬁcer that
the parties were able to paltially resolve the matter but needed additional time to resolve all issues rather
than go to a hearing. The parties also requested cancelation of the hearing date to accommodate the
extended mediation. The extension was granted and the hearing date was cancelled. In an electronic
transmission, the Parent’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter had been resolved and
withdrew the matter with prejudice.

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the mediation.
The date for the mailing the Final Decision and Order is March 13, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Stamtes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

1 / \ L W ' x 1/
Hearing OftTéeﬁSignahJIe

  

\Justino Rosado
Hearing Officer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

