April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

New Britain Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attorney Lawrence Berliner
Law Ofﬁces of Lawrence W. Berliner, LLC
1720 Post Road East, Suite. 214B
Westpoit, CT 06880

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the program provided by the Board for the 2013-2014 school year
appropriate and did it provide the Student with a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) in the least restrictive environment (LRE)?

2. Was the program provided by the Board for the 2014-2015 school year
appropriate and did it provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE?

3. Is the program offered by the Board for the 2015-2016 school year appropriate
and does it provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE?

4. Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of FAPE?

w

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §10-
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administration Procedures Act, CGS §§4-176e t0 4-178, inclusive,
and 4-181a and 4-186.

SUMMARY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and p1acementteam(PPT) meeting,
the Parents were of the opinion that the program offered for the 2014-2015 school year did not
provide FAPE. The Board disagreed with the Parents and the Parents ﬁled for due process. The
parties attended a resolution meeting on April 24, 2015 but a resolution was not attained.

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15—0455

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on April 14, 2015; a pre-hearing conference was held
on June 1, 2015. Hearing dates of July 27 and 28, 2015; August 27 and 31, 2015; September 8
and 30, 2015; October 6 and 7, 2015; November 12, 17 and 30, 2015 were chosen by the parties.
The July 28, 2015 and September 30, 2015 hearing date were cancelled by the parties. The
Board presented Exhibits 1 thru 52. B-47 and 48 were marked for identiﬁcation only; B-47 and
B—52 were excluded as exhibits. All other Board exhibits were full exhibits of the hearing.
Parents presented Exhibits 1 through 37. Parents’ Exhibits1 6, 9, 13 and 27-33 were excluded as
exhibits of the hearing. Parents’ Exhibit No. 13 was completed after the initial request for
hearing in April, 2015, and was not provided to the District until .1 uly, 2015. The report was
reviewed by the PPT on August 20, 2015, and will only be considered with respect to the 2015-
16 school year. On August 31, 2015, the parties agreed to amend the due process request and
include the following issues: Is the program offered by the Board for the 2015-2016 school year
appropriate and does it provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE?

The Board ﬁled a motion to join Department of Developmental Services (DDS) as a party to the
Due Process hearing. Following the submission of various motions and oral argument, on July
27, 2015, the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the Parents’ and DDS’ motion to dismiss the Board’s
motion to include them as a party to the administrative proceeding.

The Parents’ attorney presented seven witnesses: the Parents; Brian Liu (Evergreen Center); Dr.
Aguayo (Psychiatrist); Dr. Powers (Psychologist); Dr. Molteni (Psychologist); and Dr. Carabillo
(Director of Pupil Services). The Board called ﬁve witnesses: Dr. Loss (Psychologist); Elizabeth
Healey (Special Education Teacher); Mary Daly (SLP-CCC); Susan Douville (BCBA) and Dr.
Carabillo (Director of Pupil Services).

A motion was ﬁled by the Parents’ attorney requesting that a witness be allowed to testify by
telephone. There was no objection by the Board and a protocol was established in order for the
witness to testify. Hearing Ofﬁcer’s Exhibit2 No. An afﬁdavit was received from the Notary
Public who administered the oath. (HO. 4) The parties were given copies of the afﬁdavit.

At the conclusion of the evidentiary portion of the hearing, a brieﬁng schedule was discussed and
the parties agreed to ﬁle simultaneous post trial briefs on J anuary 20, 2016. The briefs were
timely ﬁled by both parties after an extension of time to ﬁle the briefs was requested and the
extension was granted. The parties were instructed that any factual references and arguments
presented in the briefs had to have a factual basis of prior evidence presented during the course
of the hearing.

This Final Decision and Order set forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference
certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the
record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent that the
summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of law, they

‘ Hereafter Parents’ Exhibits will be noted as “P” followed by the number of the exhibit.
2 Hereafter Hearing Ofﬁcer’s Exhibits will be noted as “H.O.” followed by the number of the exhibit.

2

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

should be so considered and vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. v. S. & H. Computer Systems, Inc.,
605 F .Supp. 816 (M.D.Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F.v. Callallen Independent School Board,
835 F.Supp. 340 (S.D.Tex. 1993).

 

 

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the
hearing date and the brieﬁng schedule. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is
Februaiy April 22, 2016.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1.

The Student is diagnosed with Autism and eligible to receive special education and
related services as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Educational Improvement
Act (“IDEA”) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a.
(Board’s Exhibit3 No. 26).

The Student has also been diagnosed with an Intellectual Disability, Impulse Control
Disorder, Conduct Disorder, Anxiety Disorder, Insomnia, and Stereotypic Movement
Disorder with Self—lnjury. (B-3).

The Student is severely cognitively delayed, with his full-scale IQ score ranging between
34 and 39. The severity of his autism and maladaptive behaviors impede the acquisition
of new skills. The Student is primarily non-Verbal. (B-20, B-23, Testimony of Speech and
Language Therapist)

The Student attends the River Street Autism Program at Coltsville, a state approved
program that operates year round, providing 240 days of consistent stafﬁng and
educational programming ﬁve days/week, and includes extended day services until 4:00
pm. each day. (P—21)

The Depaltment of Developmental Services (“DDS”) contracts with Man‘akech to
provide 40 hours of in—home support to the Parents in the evenings and on weekends. In
April 2015, for a period of 30 days, DDS also provided 24—hours/day 0f round-the-clock
in—home support at the Mother’s house. (B-2, B-3, B-13, Testimony of F ather).

The Student currently lives at home with his mother, sister and maternal grandmother.
The grandmother assists with the Student’s care and is the primary care giver in the
home. Parents are divorced and share custody. The student stays with his father on F riday
and returns Monday morning. (Testimony of Mother)

The Student has always been enrolled in the Board’s school. In June 2008, the Student
started attending Capital Region Education Council (CREC). The Student began to
demonstrate aggression during summer recess. The Mother requested extended school
year services in 2010 and the Board complied. (Testimony of Mother)

3 Hereafter Board’s Exhibits will be noted as “B” followed by the number of the exhibit.

3

 

April 26, 2016 F inal Decision and Order Case No. 15—0455

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

In January 2008, a psychological evaluation was performed of the Student. The evaluator
recommended a full day educational program with the support of a one to one aide. It was
recommended that the program be an extended school year program with 225-230 day
with a Board Certiﬁed Behavioral Analysis (BCBA). The evaluator recommended that
the Parents participate in monthly team meetings. Parent training should be included in
the Student’s Individualized Education Program (IEP) to facilitate consistency across
settings. Visual supports should be used extensively to assist the Student in his
participation in activities. Behavior was a concern but not an issue. Dr. Powers
recommended that the Student attend the CREC, Coltsville program. (B—41, Testimony of
Dr. Michael Powers)

At a PPT meeting in 2010, the Student’s program was changed. The Student’s school day
was extended from eight am to four pm. The extended school year remained the same.
(Testimony of Mother)

In the 2011 triennial behavioral summary it was noted that data collection for elopement
was discontinued in 2009 as it was not observed to be an unsafe behavior. In 2010 the
behavior was observed to have changed, as the Student was now running away from an
adult. Data collection of this behavior was reestablished. With the introduction of a
verbal reprimand in 2011, elopement behavior decreased. (P-l7)

During the 2008, 2009 and until March 2010, the Student was using pull-ups during the
school day. In March 2010 pull-ups were discontinued during the school day and the
Student began to use underwear. He was being tripped t0 the bathroom eveiy two hours
with small edibles as a prompt and a larger reinforcer for spontaneous initiations. The
Student was initiating the bathroom approximately once every two weeks. (P-17)

On April 4, 2011, the Student was evaluated by the school psychologist. Based on the
evaluation, the evaluator found that the Student:

a. Continued to beneﬁt from a self—contained special education program with a one
to one ABA Program.

b. Continue to require a Behavioral Intervention Plan (BIP) to address aggression,
head banging, throwing and grounding behavior.

0. Continued to beneﬁt from frequent repetition within a discrete trial fashion in
order to master new material.

d. Continues to need help in dressing skills, training within the school environment
for using the bathroom. At home he continues to wear pull-ups.

e. Required generalization of all skills learned need to be programmed for in all
environments with regards to activities of daily living, academic skills, and areas
of socialization.

(P—17 pgs. 7-8)

During the 2012-2013 school year, the Student had mastered several of academic
objectives, including his math objective and his objectives targeting sorting and matching
skills. He also made progress on his self—help skills of dressing and meal preparation and
on his socialization objectives, which targeted, among other skills, turn—taking. He was

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

able to make at least 4 exchanges of the IPad with a peer, made satisfactory progress or
mastered all but one of his communication objectives, and similarly made satisfactory
progress or mastered all but one of his behavior goals/objeotives. (B—29, Testimony of
Special Education Teacher).

The Student would not allow a dentist to touch him. A basic dental desensitization
program was put in place to facilitate tolerance of basic dental equipment. In May 2013,
this program was put on hold when the Student chipped his front tooth during the
weekend, while under Marrakech care. The program was resumed in August 2013. The
program was modiﬁed to avoid his chipped tooth. The Student’s aggression, head hitting
and tantrum behaviors escalated after this incident. The Student showed tolerance for the
medical equipment when administered by the school nurse. (B-22, B-31)

In January 2012 a toileting program was implemented using cue cards. This was modiﬁed
in July 2013 by utilizing designated trip times to the bathroom during the school day. In
January 2014 the trip time was eliminated from the schedule to encourage the Student to
independently request to go to the bathroom. A bathroom reminder was placed at the
Student’s workstation and another in his Picture Exchange Communication System
(PECS) book. The instructor reads the reminder at the designated trip time and provides a
delay for the Student to respond. (B-22)

During the 2013-2014 school year, the toileting program continued to be implemented.
The main focus of the program was bathroom initiation, The Student was wearing
underwear during the school day and successfully producing urine on the toilet on the
average of 1.5 times per day. Toilet incidents in school remained at near zero level. The
Student had three incidents during the school year and these were attributed to illness.
The Student uses pampers for his transportation home. (B—22, Testimony of School
BCBA)

On September 17, 2013, Marrakesh, the DDS contracted provider of in-home services to
the Student, provided a progress review of the Student. Every hour and a half the
provider would prompt the Student to utilize the bathroom. At ﬁrst the Student was non-
compliant. The Student, with prompting, would pull down his pants independently.
Starting in August, 2013, the Student would occasionally urinate in the toilet at the
Marrakesh Island Lane site. The Student would indicate his wants or needs by tapping the
staff on the shoulder. He sometimes verbalizes what he wants by using one word when he
is given a choice between two to three items. (B—33)

On September 17, 2013, the Board convened a PPT meeting. The Board reviewed various
reports. The PPT recommended the continuation of the CREC extended day program of
forty (40) hours per week. The Parents presented their concerns with the CREC program
and placement and reported that the program has not helped the Student. The Parents
reported that they were pleased with Marrakech, the DDS funded private provider of
home services. (B-26)

 

April 26, 2016 F inal Decision and Order Case No. 15—0455

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

The Father requested placement at CCCD in Milford. The Mother did not request this
change. A review of the program in Milord showed a decrease in the number of school
days and the Mother was not in agreement with a reduction. (Testimony of Chief
Academic Ofﬁcer)

The Student’s 2013-2014 Annual Behavior Summary showed he mastered two objectives
of the ﬁve objectives of the Goal to increase appropriate behaviors and made slow
progress in the other three obj ectives. In his Goal to decrease maladaptive behaviors, he
mastered one objective and made slow progress in the other two. (B-15)

The Student’s monthly average behaviors showed a decrease in four of the ﬁve targeted
behaviors. The Property Destruction targeted behavior showed a slight increase of .1 for
the 2013-2014 school year. Head banging decreased on a monthly average by 48.1. (B-
15)

The Student mastered three of his independent living skills goal and made progress in the
other three objectives during the 2013- 2014 school year. The Student requires
redirection to complete functional routines. He requires extra time to complete motor
tasks engaging or separating a zipper 01' fastening shirt buttons. (B-17)

The Student’s Triennial Behavioral Summary for the 2013-2014 school year showed that
his aggression and head hitting continued to be high at the beginning of the school year.
This was attributed to the chipped tooth incident of May 2013. As the year progressed
these behavior incidents decreased. (B-22)

In the March, 2014 triennial, maladaptive behavior, though variable on a shorter-term
basis, were overall at lower levels over the past three years. Daily occurrences of
grounding and elopement were low (elopement behavior had decreased since 2011). In
addition, property destruction had decreased, as had tantrum behavior. (B—22, Testimony
of BCBA).

The Mother stated that she was not provided with training in the home. The Mother also
complained that the Student was not able to generalize skills learned at CREC in the
home. The school offered to come to the home once a month and would provide Parent
training. (Testimony of Mother)

The Student’s school routinely offers 1 to 2 complimentary parent trainings a year, on
topics such as PECS communication training and self—care/self-help training. Ongoing
parent training has also been offered to the Parents through the Student’s school’s clinical
reviews which are held approximately every 6 weeks and are run by the clinical director.
((Testimony BCBA)

In 2014, the Mother had the Student reevaluated by Dr. Michael Powers who had
previously evaluated him in 2008. (See Findings of Fact No. 8) The evaluator did not
observe the Student in the school because the reports he had received from the school
were consistent and comprehensive. He trusted the school’s evaluators. The evaluator did

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15—0455

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

not test for generalization because the Student was not capable of generalizing across
varied settings. The Student is capable of generalization under tightly controlled and
similar circumstances. The Student needs consistency in his program. (Testimony of Dr.
Michael Powers)

The reevaluations showed that the Student’s non—verbal cognitive was in the 2 1/2 to 5
year level and his verbal abilities were below the 2 1/2 age equivalent. The Student’s day
to day skill sets were between the 6 month to 2 1/2 year level. The Student’s
comprehensive and intensive program included 40 hours per week of educational services
and 40 hours per week of home and community services provided through DDS. Despite
this level of care the Student made minimal progress. (Testimony Dr. Michael Powers, B-

3)

The Student’s BIP needs to be adjusted continuously. The evaluator was not aware if any
adjustments were done to the BIP. The Student’s specia1 education teacher reported that
his academic skills, including matching, simple expressive identiﬁcation, one-to-one
correspondence, and following simple one-step directions must be addressed consistently
or he will regress. (B-3)

Dr. Michael Powers did not observe the Student in his school setting because the school’s
evaluators were trustworthy. He did not ask the Student’s teachers to conduct the
teachers’ report for the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 11 because they had
completed one seven months prior for the Student’s triennia1 evaluation. The Parents
were the informants for the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 11. Dr. Powers had
recommended the school the Student currently attends, when he eva1uated the Student in
2008. (Testimony of Dr. Michael Powers, B-3)

Dr. Powers’ recommendation is a specialized residential therapeutic educational
placement for the Student, targeting an intensive toileting protocol, a functional
communications program and instructions in basic adaptive living ski115. The Student’s
current toileting program does not address night time toileting. There is a concern about
the Student’s reaction to his removal from the community. The evaluator concurred with
the PPT’s recommendation that the Student be seen for an Alternative Augmentative
Communication (AAC) evaluation. The Doctor does not expect the Student to be able to
live independently; the issue is the level of suppmt the Student Will require. (Testimony
of Dr. Michael Powers P-3)

On November 18, 2014, the Student was hospitalized by his Parents for aggression and
self injurious behavior. The Bradley Hospital team’s discharge summary recommended
residential placement for the Student as outlined in Dr. Michael Powers’ November 2014
evaluation. (B-12)

Bradley Hospital refen'ed the Student to Dr. Patricia Aguayo, a Psychiatrist, for a follow
up after his discharge. Dr. Aguayo received background information only from the
Parents, Dr. Powers’ November 21, 2014 letter, and a discharge summary from Bradley
Hospital. Dr. Aguayo recommended a residential p1acement for the Student in order to

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No, 15-0455

34.

35.

36.

37.

381

make progress and have consistency throughout the day. The doctor was not aware what
school the Student attended nor did she attempt to contact the school in order to obtain
information about the Student’s program. The Parents had given permission for the
doctor to contact the school. The doctor is not sure that the Student will make educational
progress in a residential placement nor did she have knowledge of the recommended
placement by Dr. Powers. (Testimony of Dr. Patricia Aguayo, B-4)

Dr. Aguayo did not consult with school personnel, did not observe the Student in his
school setting and did not obsewe his separate home environments to consider whether
consistency may be achieved. (Testimony of Chief Academic Ofﬁcer )

On September 15, 2014, the Board held a PPT to conduct an annual review. The Parents
agreed with the goals that were offered but were of the opinion that the Student required
more. The Board added additional speech goals to the Student’s IEP. The Parents felt that
the Student needed more consistency between the home and school environments in order
to make progress. The Parents reported that the Student was not able to generalize
between the school and home. The Parents requested a therapeutic placement. This
request was denied. The school offered to provide monthly Visits to the home and
continue monthly meetings as part of the Parent training to review strategies that are
effective for consistency and purpose. (Testimony of Mother, B-13)

The clinical review team meets and observes the Student and reviews his program. The
Father attended one clinical review session during the 2014-2015 school year; the Mother
did not attend any sessions. The home visits offered by the Board did not occur due to the
hospitalization 0f the Student for unsafe behavior in the home. (Testimony of BCBA,
Testimony of Father)

The Student had made progress during the 2014-2015 school year. There is a room to
teach the Student activities of daily living (ADL) Which has a bed and dresser. The room
is utilized to teach the Student how to dress himself, make a bed, hang shilts and put
away laundry. By putting away the laundry, the Student also learns sorting skills. He
makes the bed and takes clothes from the laundry basket, sorts them and puts them in a
drawer. The Student can put on shirt, pants and shoes with modiﬁcations. He has a
problem putting on a shirt correctly. (Testimony of Special Education Teacher)

The Student’s behaviors of aggression, head-hitting, and propeity destruction all
decreased in the 2014-2015 school year, as evidenced by his mastery of objectives
targeting decrease of maladaptive behavior. He mastered 6/10 behavior objectives, and
made progress on 3/10 objectives. His aggression decreased to a weekly-daily average of
8 or less occurrences for 3 out of 4 weeks per month, for 2 out of 3 months. His monthly
mean for aggression was well below 8 instances per month, except for June, 2015 when
he experienced a spike. The Student also decreased his head-hitting to a weekly-daily
average of 35 or less incidents; over the course of the 2014-2015 school year, head-
hitting was under 20 incidents, with only one month above 35. (P-22, Testimony of
BCBA)

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

The Board offered revised behavior goals and obj ectives for the 2014-2015 school year.
The BCBA recommended close contact with Parents and outside agencies providing
services to the Student to aid in generalization and to ensure that all of his needs were
met in school and outside of school. (P-22, Testimony of BCBA)

The Mother did not attend all the meetings at CREC because they were not helpful. What
was shown at the meetings are not practical for the Student. The Student can sometimes
follow one step directions. The district offered to provide BCBA assistance. The Parent
already had a BCBA help in the home but it was not helpful. (Testimony of Mother)

The mother or the grandmother dresses the Student for school. They pick him up at the
bus stop. The grandmother’s primary language is Polish; she speaks a few words in
English. She is the primary caregiver for the Student. (Testimony of Mother)

The Student’s school’s PECS book was offered to the Home Specialist Therapist from
BBS so that the same book that is utilized in school is used at home. The Home Specialist
contacted the Speech and Language Therapist to ﬁnd out the strategies utilized in school
so they could be replicated at home. (Testimony of Speech and Language Therapist)

The Parents’ proposed therapeutic residential placement is Evergreen Center in
Massachusetts. The program is a highly structured residential program that would
implement the Student’s IEP. The normal class size is 5-8 students. The Student was
interviewed for placement at Evergreen Center when he was hospitalized at Hampstead
Hospital by his mother. There would be no openings for placement until January 2016.
(Testimony of Brian Liu—Constant)

The Student, if placed, would be in the Behavioral Development Program of the
Northeast Unit which is geared toward the clinical needs of the Student. This is the most
extensive unit. It is for students who have behavior issues and are self—injurious. The
Student would be provided with one on one services by a faculty member for 14 hours of
his ﬁrst 30—45 days. He would also have a one on one staff member overnight due to the
Student’s sleep regulation issue. Evergreen provides toileting skills training with the Faxx
and Azrin program model, providing adaptive daily living skill training in the residence.
The Student would be living with seven other students who are between 14 and Zlyears
of age. The Student, at age 12, would be the youngest in the unit. (Testimony of Brian
Liu-Constant)

On July 16, 2015, the Student was evaluated by Dr. Molteni, a psychologist at the
Hospital for Special Care, after he received a referral from Dr. Aguayo. The Student was
aggressive but his aggression decreased as the evaluation went forward. The evaluator
was not able to complete all assessments. The Student was able to do one step directions
and point to body parts. (Testimony of Dr Molteni, B-15)

Dr. Molteni attempted to administer the Differential Abilities Scales, 2nd Edition, but he
was not successful, and administered the Vineland Adaptive Rating Scales, the Social
Responsiveness Scales (SRS—2)) and the Childhood Autism Rating Scale-Z (CARS-Z).

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

47.

48.

49.

50.

Dr. Molteni found that the Student had ASD-Level-3, signiﬁcant developmental
challenges, Vineland Adaptive Scale scores in the well-below average range for his age
(1%), SRS-2 scores in the moderate to severe range, and CARS-2 scores that were in the
moderate to high range. Dr. Molteni diagnosis was Autism Disorder Level 3. This is the
most severe level and requires substantial support. (Testimony of Dr Molteni, B—15)

Dr. Molteni opined that the Student required extensive suppotts to acquire the
generalization of skills across all settings. He could not opine that the Student would
make adequate yearly progress. The evaluator did not obsewe the Student in the home 01'
his school setting. He was not aware of the Student’s daily function at home and that it is
challenging for the Parents to provide a consistent home environment. The doctor opined
that due to the inability to complete the Student’s assessments, no conclusion can be
drawn about his cognitive or academic skills. The difference in the behaviors exhibited in
school and home made it difﬁcult to do a direct comparison between the forms completed
by the Parent and the teachers. (Testimony of Dr Molteni, B-lS)

On August 20, 2015, the Board convened a PPT for the 2015-16 school year. The PPT
reviewed the most recent evaluation reports prepared by Dr. Weinberg, Dr. Molteni and
reports prepared by Bradley Hospital and Hampstead Hospital. The Parents requested
placement at Evergreen Center. (Testimony of Mother, P-21)

The Board recommended an assistive technology evaluation with recommendations made
by Dr Molteni, and recommended an update of the Student’s functional behavior
assessment. The Chief Academic Ofﬁcer testiﬁed that she agreed with Dr. Molteni’s
recommendations and that they were incorporated into the Student’s 2015 -1 6 IEP
because CREC was already taking baseline data, the team had agreed to the AT
evaluation, CREC was fading the use of prompts, CREC was minimizing the use of
language, and CREC was addressing the Student’s behaviors. (Testimony of Chief
Academic Ofﬁcer, P—21, P-15)

The Board offered four annual home Visits for parent training to ensure carry-over from
school to home, clinical review meetings at six week intervals, and up to 130 hours of
supports from September 2, 2015 through December 31, 2015 from a mutually agreeable
BCBA to provide the Parents with unspeciﬁed training on communication and daily
living skills, with no goals and objectives associated with those BCBA service hours. (P-
21). Further, the IEP did not list Parent Training and Counseling as a related sewice. The
Board recommended a continuation of the CREC extended day and ESY program. The
Parents rejected the IEP for the reason that it denied the Student FAPE and the proposed
program was inconsistent with the recommendations from Parents’ evaluators. (P-21)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW and ARGUMENT:

1.

It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services as
set forth in IDEA, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1401, et seq. FAPE is deﬁned as special education and
related services that are provided at public expense, meet the standards of the state

10

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

educational agency, include an appropriate school education, and that are provided in
conformity with the IEP. 20 U.S.C. §1401(8).

2. The LEA has the burden of proving the appropriateness of the Student’s program or
placement, or of the program or placement proposed by the public agency. Conn.
Agencies Regs. § 10-76h—14(a). This burden shall be met by a preponderance of the
evidence. Id

3. 1n Board of Ed. V. Rowley 458 U.S. 176, 206-07 (1982), the Supreme Court set f01th a
two-part inquiry as to whether the Board has provided an IEP that provides the Student
With FAPE: 1) whether the Board has complied With the IDEA’s procedural
requirements, and 2) whether the Board’s IEP was reasonably calculated to enable the
student to receive meaningﬁil educational benefit. Educational beneﬁt, as contemplated
by the IDEA, requires the Student’s IEP to provide him with more than trivial
educational beneﬁt, that is, meaningful educational beneﬁt, and not produce regression.
Mr. and Mrs. M. v. Milford Bd. of Ed., 103 F.2d 1114, 1120—21 (2“d Cir. 1997). There is
no requirement that an IEP has to maximize the Student’s educational potential, however,
it must provide the Student with “meaningful opportunities” and provide more than trivial
advancement. “It cannot guarantee totally successful results.” Walczak v. Florida Union
Sch. Dist. 142 F.3d 119, at 130, 133. (2d Cir. 1998). Courts have also found that “[a]
child need not improve in every area to obtain an educational beneﬁt from his [or her]
IEP.” Leighty v. Laurel Sch. Dist, 457 F. Supp. 2d 546, 554 (W.D. Pa. 2006).

 

4. The IEP is 'a written statement that sets out the child's present educational performance,
establishes annual and short-term objectives for improvements in that performance, and
describes the specially designed instruction and services that will enable the child to meet
those objectives.” R.E. v. N.Y.C. Dep't of Educ, 694 F.3d at 175; and it is “... a plan
about how to achieve that improvement.” T.K. v. New York City Dept. of Ed, Docket
No. 14-3078-cv, slip 0p. p.10, 2d Cir. (January 20, 2016) (citing M.O. V. N.Y.C. Dept. of
Educ. 793 F. 3d 236, 239 (2nd Cir 2015).atp.11. The IEP is the centerpiece ofthe
Student’s entitlement to receive special education and related services. Honig v. Doe, 484
U.S. 305, 311 (1988).

5. 1n the ﬁrst prong of the Rowley test, supra, there was no evidence presented that the
Board violated any procedural requirements of the IDEIA during the 2013-2014, 2014—
2015 and 2015-2016 school years, the years that are the focus of this hearing. PPTS were
timely held and proper notice was given to all parties. The Parents received their
procedural safeguards; they were meaningful participants at PPTS.

6. Although the second prong does not require that the state seek to “maximize" a disabled
child's potential, nevertheless, “the door of public education must be opened in a
‘meaningful way,‘ and the IEP must provide the oppmtunity for more than 0n1y 'trivial
advancement.” P. v. Newington, 546 F .3d at 119 (quoting Walczak, 142 F.3d at 130).
“An appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress,
not regression.” Walczak, 142 F.3d at 130. The program for the 2013-2014 school year
was appropriate and the Student made progress in his program.

11

 

April 26, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0455

7.

10.

11.

The Student is a young man with varied disabilities any one of which would severely
hamper his educational abilities; combined, they present a Student requiring a highly
specialized program. (Findings of Fact No.2 and 3) School districts must ensure that
each child with a disability has appropriate supplementary aids and services. The Board,
listening to the Parent’s concerns, provided the Student with an extended school year
program and school day program. (F indings of F act No.4) The Board’s program was also
supplemented by DDS. They provided an additional 40 hours of weekly in-home suppmt
sewices t0 the Student. (Findings of Fact No.5) The Father requested an out of district
placement which the Board was willing to consider. The Mother was not in agreement
with the Father’s request because at the out of district placement, the Student would
receive fewer hours than the Board was providing. (Findings of Fact No.19)

The Student during his 2013—2014 school year did not master all his goals and objectives,
but with the severity of his Autism and maladaptive behaviors, the Student did make
meaningful progress. (Findings of F act No.20, 2] and 22) Courts have found that “[a]
child need not improve in every area to obtain an educational beneﬁt from his [or her]
IEP.” Leighty v. Laurel Sch. Dist, 457 F. Supp. 2d 546, 554 (W.D. Pa. 2006). The
program for the 2013-2014 school year was appropriate and the Student made progress in
his program.

The Student’s 2014-2015 school year IEP was appropriate and provided the Student with
FAPE in the LRE. The Student had made progress during the 2014-2015 school year.
(Findings of Fact No.37) His aggressive behaviors in school had been reduced although
the Parents complained that at home he was very aggressive and had to be hospitalized on
two occasions. (F indings of Fact No.38)

The fact that a child with a cognitive disability may have limited potential for academic
achievement in the general education classroom does not mean the child cannot receive
an educational beneﬁt in that environment. In addition to academic progress,
nonacademic considerations such as self—care are equally important aspects of special
education for some students. The Student demonstrates in the school environment the
ability to follow a toileting protocol; this is also generalized with after school providers
from Marrakech.

A child with the issues portrayed by the Student requires consistency in their program.
(Findings of Fact No.29) The Parents argue that the Student does not generalize what he
learns in school and at home he portrays a different picture than is reported by the School
staff. The Parents are not cooperating in the trainings offered by the Board. (Findings of
Fact No.35 and 36) The Mother testiﬁed that the training offered is not helpful, so she
does not go after attending a PPT. (F indings of F act No.40) The Parent could have called
for a PPT to rectify what she sees as inadequate. In August 2015, the Mother went to a
training session. (Testimony of Mother). The Student’s IEPs goals and objectives for the
2014-2015 school are written to provide the Student with an appropriate program in the
least restrictive environment. The Student’s level of progress, though not at mastery

12

 

April 26, 2016 F inal Decision and Order Case No. 15—0455

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

level, is sufﬁcient to demonstrate that the Student has received F APE in the LRE
environment. (Findings of F act No. 37, 38 and 39)

The program offered by the Board for the 2015—2016 school year is not appropriate.

The Student has three care givers in the home, his mother, grandmother, and on
weekends, his father. The Parents testify of a high rate of frustration with the Student’s
behavior. The Parents and their witnesses all testify of a need for a therapeutic residential
placement for the Student, and consistency between home and school environments if
progress is to be made. The Student does not generalize what he has learned in school.

The Parents are divorced and the Student stays with the Father on weekends. There is a
lack of consistency between the homes regarding the Student’s activities. The Student’s
eating, sleeping and other activities of daily living are different in each home. All
providers and evaluators are in agreement that without consistency across all
environments the Student will not progress to levels where he will be able to expand his
social skills.

In school, the Student is in a structured environment. There is a consistency in his start
times and eating times; his bathroom protocol is every 1 1/2 hours whether he imitates or
an indirect prompt is used to take him to the bathroom. From the only report prepared by
Mairakech, the staff reports in its progress review that the Student was successfully
taught to urinate in the bathroom, pull down his pants and sit on the toilet. At home he
smears his feces on the walls and takes off his clothes. While in the school and with the
Mairakech staff, he does exhibit maladaptive behaviors but has yet to require
hospitalization due to injurious behaviors (except on one occasion, for the chipped tooth
from head banging). In the home, the Mother has had to hospitalize him twice and has
contemplated hospitalizing him on other occasions. The Board offered to provide 130
hours of in—home parent training services. Though offered, it Was not part of the IEP as a
related service. C.F.R. §34.300.34 (c) (8) Individual related services terms deﬁned. The
terms used in this deﬁnition are deﬁned as follows:

(i) Parent counseling and training means assisting parents in understanding the

special needs of their child;

(ii) Providing parents with information about child development; and

(iii) Helping parents to acquire the necessary skills that will allow them to support

the implementation of their child’s lEP or IFSP.
Clearly 130 hours of in-home parent training services is a related service that must be
shown in his IEP. (See Parents ' Post Trial BriefProposed F indings ofFacI‘pg. 12
Paragraph 23). Even if it had not been offered as a related service, it is clearly necessary
for the Student to receive FAPE.

Although the Parents were not taking advantage of the training offered by the Board, it
does not mean the Board should not include in the Student’s IEP a service that would
assist the Parents in understanding why the Student does not generalize what he seems to
be able to do in the school and with Marrakech‘ (F indings of Fact No.35 and 36) One of
the Student’s main caregivers in the home is the grandmother. The Board has not

13

 

April 26, 2016 F inal Decision and Order Case No. 15~0455

17.

18.

19.

20.

considered including her in the training or inviting her to observe the clinical reviews
Although she speaks very limited English, translators could be provide to assist her in
understanding why the Student’s program is successful in the school environment and
any changes that she could implement to have consistency across environments. The
program offered by the Board is not appropriate.

The Parents request placement at Evergreen in Massachusetts. All the Parents’ evaluators
agree that the Student requires a therapeutic residential placement. Just because an
evaluation indicates a student‘s need for a therapeutic placement, does not mean the
district has an obligation to place the student in a residential facility. Federal courts have
held that a district only has to provide a residential placement when doing so is necessary
for the student to make educational progress. MC. V. Starr 64 IDELR 273 (D. Md. 2014)
(The proposed therapeutic day school would have provided all of the services and
supports the student required to receive FAPE). In this matter, Dr. Aguayo stated that she
did not know if the Student would make educational progress in Evergreen Center
(Findings of Fact No. 33) and Dr. Molteni could not opine if the Student would make
educational progress in Evergreen Center (F indings of Fact N0. 48)

 

Evergreen Center is not an appropriate placement for the Student. In P. V. Newington
546 F .3d at 120, the Second Circuit expressly adopted the Third Circuit's test for
determining whether an IEP places a student in the least restrictive environment, as set
forth in Obeiti V. Clementon School District, 995 F.2d 1204, 1215 (3d Cir. 1993). The
two-pronged Oberli test states that a court must consider, ﬁrst, ”whether a student can be
satisfactorily educated in the regular classroom with the beneﬁt of supplemental aids and
services," and, second, if the court determines the school district was justiﬁed in
removing the child from the regular classroom and placing him or her in a special
education classroom, "whether the school has included the child in school programs with
nondisabled children to the maximum extent possible." P. v. Newingtan, 546 F.3d at 121
(quoting Oberti 995 F.2d at 1218). When analyzing the ﬁrst prong of the Oberti test, the
coult should consider several factors, including: (1) whether the school district has made
reasonable eff01ts to accommodate the child in a regular classroom; (2) the educational
beneﬁts available to the child in a regular class, with appropriate supplementary aids and
services, as compared to the beneﬁts provided in a special education class; and (3) the
possible negative effects of the inclusion of the child on the education of the other
students in the class.

In this matter, it is the Parents who are seeking a more restrictive setting for the Student;
the change is not from a general education environment to a more restrictive
environment, but from a restrictive environment to a more restrictive environment. On
the LRE continuum, an out of district residential placement is more restrictive than a
special education environment in the district.

In analyzing Evergreen Center as an appropriate LRE, the ﬁrst factor of the ﬁrst prong of
Oberti Supra, asks, “Whether the school district has made reasonable efforts to
accommodate the child in a regular classroom, Clearly the District accommodates the
Student in his classroom setting. The second factor in the ﬁrst prong of Oberti is where a

 

14

 

April 26, 2016 F inal Decision and Order Case No. 15—0455

change in placement t0 the more restrictive LRE, Evergreen Center, would fail the Oberti
test. The district has not provided the Student with appropriate aids and services. See
(Conclusions of Law No. 16 and 17). The Board needs to provide all appropriate
supplementary aids and services before a more restrictive setting can be considered for
the Student. Evergreen is not the Student’s LRE; the Board must provide the in-home
training services.

21‘ To the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed herein,
the Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The program offered by the board for the 2013-2014 school year was appropriate.
2. The program offered by the board for the 2014-2015 school year was appropriate.
3. The program offered by the board for the 2015-2016 school year is not appropriate.

4. Within 10 school days of the publishing of this decision the Board shall conduct a PPT
meeting to amend the Student’s IEP to include 14 hours a week of in-home-training (two hours
per day) by a BCBA. The 14 hours shall consist of two hours each day where the Student is
residing on that particular day.
a. The ﬁrst two weeks the BCBA shall take data of the Student’s behavior in the home
and toileting protocol. The data shall be taken of the Student both in the Mother’s House
and in the Father’s house. The BCBA shall train the Parents and the grandmother on how
to take data.
b. The Board shall provide a translator to accompany the BCBA to the Mother’s home at
all times to ensure that the grandmother understands what needs to be done.
0. After two weeks of data collection, the Board shall conduct a PPT to review the data
and plan an in-home program to assist and train the Parents and the grandmother on the
generalization of toileting and self-help skills the Student is learning in the ADL room.
d. This service shall be a part of the Student’s IEP and shall continue and be reviewed in
his annual PPT meeting.
e. The BCBA shall also contact Marrakech to obsewe the Student for two one hour
sessions for the same two weeks that data is being collected from the home, unless
Marrakech can provide the information from their own data collection for that two week
period.
f. Dr. Loss and Dr. Weinberg shall be contacted and they will confer and recommend a
mutually agreed upon BCBA to provide the data collection and in—home services and
training.

15

 

If the local 01‘ regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisiOns of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title'20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

   

5
Hearingbffmalufé/

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

