July 13, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0496

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. CTHSS Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Christine Chinni, Esq.
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: J ustino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

Does the Student’s disability preclude the participation in a vocational program without requiring
fundamental alterations of the program even if the Student is provided with special education and
related services as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Emotional Disturbance and is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education in the least restrictive environment as deﬁned in the Individuals With
Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U,S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General
Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent objected to the
denial of the acceptance of the Student to attend the vocational school. The Parent requested placement
in the vocational school. The Board refused the Parent’s request.

The Board received notice of the request for due process on May 11, 2015. An impartial hearing
ofﬁcer was appointed on May 7, 2015, and a pre—hearing conference was held on May 20, 2015. The
parties advised the hearing ofﬁcer that they were going to a resolution meeting. The resolution meeting
was pending. If the matter was not resolved another preheaving conference would be conducted. On
June 6, 2015 an electronic transmission was sent asking for the result of the resolution meeting. The
Parent requested a call from the hearing ofﬁce. The Parent was advised that an ex-parte contact was
not possible, but to advise about the resolution meeting.

The Board advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter was resolved. An electronic transmission was
sent advising that the Parent needed to request a withdrawal if the matter was resolved or advise if it
had not been resolved. On July 7, 2015, the parties were advised that the matter would be dismissed if
a response to the hearing ofﬁcer’s request was not received. There was no response from the palties.
The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is July 14, 2015.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

lfthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

   

y“ ’ 11

Healing Ofﬁ‘geISi'gnamre

 
  
 

  

‘Justino Rosado
Heating Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupagadoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

