April 1, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0317

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Bolton Board of Education and Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Is the Board of Education’s evaluation appropriate?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Bolton Board of Education ﬁled this request for a special education due process hearing
on J anuary 21, 2015. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to the case on January
22, 2015. A prehearing conference was held on February 19, 2015. Attorney Linda Yoder
appeared on behalf of the Board of Education and the Student’s mother appeared on behalf
of the Student. At that time, the parties reported that they had settled the case in principal at
the resolution meeting. The deadline for submitting the ﬁnal decision was initially
established to be March 6, 2015. That deadline was later extended to April 4, 2015 to allow
the parties additional time to ﬁnalize documentation of their agreement.

On March 30, 2015, the Board of Education reported that the settlement had been ﬁnalized
and requested that the case be dismissed.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board of Education’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is
dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.
Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@PW

Hearing O‘I‘ﬁcer Signature

ﬂprg’RD

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

