August 21, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15-0027

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl V. Ridgeﬁeid Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Father, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berehem Moses & Devlin PC
57 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: J anis C. J erman
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Father Via Request for Impaltial Special Education Hearing. It was received by the Board of
Education (“BOB”) on July 11. 2 The 30-day resolution period ended August 10. The deadline
to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is September 24.
The following issues are identiﬁed in the request for due process:
1. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education
during the 201344 school year?
2. If the answer to Issue One is in the negative, is Student’s unilateral placement
appropriate?
3. Should the Board of Education be required to pay for Student’s unilateral placement
for the 2014—15 school year?
Student’s Father also raised as an issue the question of whether BOE breached an oral
contract entered into at mediation on May 22. The Hearing Ofﬁcer does not have jurisdiction

over breach of contract claims so that issue is not identiﬁed for hearing in this case.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educationa1 Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S,C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student”,
“Parents”, “School” and titles of school staff members and certain other witnesses in place of names and other
personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2014 unless otherwise indicated.

 

A telephonic pre—hearing conference was scheduled for J uly 28. Student’s Father
indicated that he was not available on that date and asked that the pre—hearing conference be
rescheduled to a date during the week of August 1 1.

On August 7, Student’s Father withdrew the request for due process without prejudice
and indicated that he was in the process of engaging a new attorney. BOE did not object to the

request for withdrawal without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed without prejudice.

1
‘ .1

' If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
' .“13r0yfd1'ng special education for the student requiring spcéial education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing oﬁﬁccr within ﬁfteen days aﬁar .
rcceipi thereof, the Stat'e Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce Lhc

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

’ Appeals ﬁom the hearing decis1on of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
cou11 by either party in accprdancc With the provisidns ofScction 4-183, Connecticut
Gcnqal Statutes, and Titlc 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

m;  anng Ofﬁcer Signature

:Smxl is c. .qaumiw

. Heédng Ofﬁcer Name in Print ,

/

signpnge doc (ho disk)
4/l/04.

m“-- .-. ..‘. 1_ 1,

