August 10, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0637

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Bridgeport Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Susan Freedman
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Is the Board’s proposed transition program for the Student appropriate?
2. 1f the Board’s proposed transition program is not appropriate, is the Disability Network program
the appropriate program for the Student?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On July 10, 2015, the Bridgeport Board of Education received Student’s Special Education Due Process
Hearing Request. The undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on Ju1y 6, 2015. During the
preheating conference held on July 15, 2015, the deadline for mailing the Final Decision and Order was
established as Friday, September 23, 2015. On July 16, 2015, at a second prehearing conference, the
parties indicated that an agreement was anticipated shortly. On August 3, 2015, in response to an email
requesting the status of the case, Parent indicated that the matter had resolved, but that Parent was
awaiting receipt of the Individualized Education Program documenting that Student’s transition program
was the one agreed upon before withdrawing the hearing request. On August 5, 2015, Parent sent an
email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer indicating that she had received the documentation she needed in order to
withdraw the hearing request.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action 011 the ﬁndings or prescription 0fthe hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after '
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Mm;

/Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

Brawl}? H. FH’OM

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

