F ebruary 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15—0094

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Fairﬁeld Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michele C. Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the neuropsychological evaluation conducted by the Board appropriate? If not;
2. Should the Board conduct an independent neuropsychological evaluation at public expense?

JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §10-76h
and related regulations, 20 United States Code§1415(t) and related regulations, and in accordance with
the Uniform Administration Procedure Act, CGS §§4-176e t0 4—178, inclusive, and 4-181a and 4-186.

SUMMARY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA)
20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and placement
team (PPT) meeting, the Parent stated that the neuropsychological evaluation conducted by the Board
was not appropriate and requested an independent neuropsychological evaluation at public expense.
The Board denied the Parent’s request and on August 14, 2014, the Board ﬁled for due process.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on August 14, 2014 and a pre-hearing conference was held
on September 4, 2014. Hearing dates of October 21, 2014, November 21, 2014 and December 16 and
18, 2014 were chosen by the parties. The November 21, 2014 hearing date was cancelled. The Board
presented Exhibits 1 thru 58 which were full exhibits of the hearing. Parents presented Exhibits 1
through 87. Parents’ Exhibits‘ 3-82 and 85-86 were marked for identiﬁcation only, but were later
accepted as full exhibits. Parents’ Exhibits 1, 2, 83 and 84 were excluded as exhibits of the hearing.
Parents’ Exhibit P-87 was accepted as a full exhibit of the hearing.

' Hereafter Parents’ Exhibits will be noted as “P” followed by the number of the exhibit.
1

 

February 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0094

The Parents presented four witnesses and the Board presented two witnesses. The Board objected to
the Parents’ opening statement on issues that were not issues of the hearing, and that the Board had
other documents that were not provided to the Parents. The obj ection was sustained.

At the conclusion of the evidentiary poition of the hearing, a brieﬁng schedule was discussed and the
panties agleed to ﬁ1e,0n J anuaiy 20, 2015, simultaneous post trial briefs The briefs were timely ﬁled
by both parties. The panties were instructed that any factual references and arguments presented 1n the
briefs had to have a factual basis of prio1 evidence presented du11ng the cou1se of the hearingz.

This Final Decision and Order set fo1th the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s summary, ﬁndings of fact and
conclusions of law. The ﬁndings of facts and conclusions of law set feith herein, which reference
certain exhibits and witness testimony, are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the
record. All evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent that the
summary, procedural history and ﬁndings of fact actually represent conclusions of law, they should be
so considered and Vice versa. SAS Institute Inc. V. S & H. Computer Systems Inc., 605 F.Supp. 816
(M.D.Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F.V. Caliailen Independent School Board, 835 F.Supp. 340
(S.D.Tex. 1993).

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate the hearing
date and the brieﬁng schedule. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is February 25, 2015.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

1. The Student is diagnosed with Autism and eligible to receive special education and related
services as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Educational Improvement Act (“IDEA”)
20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a. (Board’s Exhibit3 No. 23)

2. In March 2008, the Parents referred the Student for evaluations. The Parents were concerned
with the Student’s language development and lack of eye contact. The Student was exhibiting
behaviors consistent with autism (hand ﬂapping). The evaluators found that the Student’s
communication skill development, adaptive skills development, and ﬁne motor skills were
signiﬁcantly delayed. (Testimony of F ather, B -1)

3. At the July 8, 2009 PPT meeting, the Student was found to be eligible to receive special
education and related services as deﬁned in IDEA under the classiﬁcation of Developmental
Delay. The Student was provided with speech and language and occupational therapy services.
(13-9)

4. At the April 25, 2010 PPT meeting, the team determined that the Student’s classiﬁcation under
IDEA should be Speech and Language Impaired. The Teacher rated the Student’s social skills
as at risk. The Student was provided with speech and language services, occupational therapy

2 Parents’ Post Trial Brief makes a page by page analysis of D1". Grayson’s neuropsychological evaluation. This is the
evaluation that is the issue of the hearing. Most of the Parents’ analysis was not provided as testimony during the
evidentimy portion of the hearing and cannot be considered as evidence of the hearing and a basis of the argument of the
Parents’ Post Trial Brief.
3 Hereafter Board’s Exhibits will be noted as “B” followed by the number of the exhibit,

2

 

February 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0094

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

services and adaptive physical education. He was provided with social skills group service for
10 days as extended school year. (B-17)

In September 2011, the Parents expressed concerns about the Student and requested
reevaluations to determine if the Student had an undiagnosed disorder. Based on the Parents’
concern a reevaluation was agreed to by the team. (B-19)

At the February 10, 2012 PPT, the team changed the Student’s classiﬁcation to Autism. This
change was based on the reevaluations conducted at the request of the Parents and the
Worksheet for Eligibility Determination for Autism. A new individualized education program
(IEP) was created with goals and objectives to address the Student’s needs. (B-23, B-24)

During the 2013-2014 school year, the Student attended the second grade at the Board’s
elementary school. Based on concerns raised by the Parents at the October 18, 2013 PPT
meeting, the team recommended that behavior strategies be used to help the Student. (B-29)

On November 27, 2013, a Behavior Plan was created to address the unaccepted behavioral
concerns raised by the team at the October 18, 2013 PPT meeting. A Board Certiﬁed
Behavioral Analyst (BCBA) would provide ongoing consults in regard to the effectiveness of
the plan, the implementation of strategies and staff training. (B-29, B-30)

On J anuary 27, 2014, the Student became upset that he was not picked in a game that was being
p1ayed in the music class. The Student bolted from the room and was stopped by the school
psychologist and the para-professional. (P-16)

The occupational therapist noted that the Student was signiﬁcantly resistant to accept help, had
difﬁculty completing adult—directed tasks, difﬁculty transitioning back to class, difﬁculty with
self—reguiation and difﬁculty with frustration tolerance. The Student’s special education
teacher recommended to the Parents to move up the Student’s triennial evaluation in order to
conduct evaluations to tiy and ascertain Why certain academic tasks resulted in behavioral
outbursts. (B-34, Testimony of Special Education Teacher (SET))

At the February 7, 2014 PPT, the district recommended moving up the triennial reevaluations
to address the concerns about the Student’s difﬁcuities that resulted in classroom outbursts.
The Parents’ advocate stated that the Parents were not in agreement with conducting triennial
evaluations at that time. (Testimony of SET, B-35)

The Parents requested an outside neuropsychological evaluation and a Functional Behavioral
Assessment. (FBA). The Parents were concerned about the Student’s classroom outbursts and
his academic performance. (Testimony of Mother and F ather)

The PPT agreed to the neuropsychological evaluations and the FBA. The district provided the
Parents with two evaluators to conduct the neuropsychological evaluation and the name of a
BCBA assigned to conduct the FBA. The Parents chose Dr. Richard Grayson to conduct the
neuropsycho1ogical evaluation. (P—25, P-26, P-29)

On March 7, 2014, Dr. Grayson contacted the Parents in order to advise them of his scheduling
procedures in conducting an evaluation. (P—44)
3

 

Febmary 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0094

15. The FBA was completed on April 7, 2014 and was presented on April 11, 2014 at the PPT.
The FBA recommended adjusting the current behavioral plan; antecedent modiﬁcations to
alleviate the escape behavior; teaching the Student replacement behaviors; frequent reviews of
the behavior plan during the course of the day; and providing the Student supports within the
classroom setting. The team agreed to modify the Student’s IEP. (B-46, B-47)

16. The Parent was impressed with the FBA conducted by the Board and the Student was not
displaying problems this school year. (Testimony of Mother)

17. In their retainer letter, the Board erroneously identiﬁed the evaluator as a psychiatrist and the
evaluation as a psychiatric evaluation. The evaluator is a Pediatric Neuropsychologist and he
conducted a neuropsychological evaluation. (B-58)

18. The neuropsychological evaluation was conducted on April 7, 14 and 29, 2014 in the Student’s
2"d grade general education classroom. In preparation for the evaluation, the evaluator
reviewed the Student’s prior IEPs and evaluations, conducted an interview with the Parents,
and met with school staff to obtain their concerns. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson, 8—49)

19. The Board presented the evaluator with three issues for the evaluation: (1) the Student’s current
academic abilities, (2) If there were any psychological factors impacting the Student, and (3)
updated information on his autism diagnosis. (B-60)

20. At the time of the evaluation, the Student was taking Guanfacine under the supervision of his
psychiatrist. Two weeks after the evaluation, the Student’s medication was changed to
Risperdal. (B—49, Testimony of Father)

21. Dr. Grayson used the following assessment tools to evaluate the Student: (1) Stanford Binet
Intelligence Scales-Sth Edition(SB—V), (2) Woodcock-Johnson III Normative Updates Test of
Achievement (Form A), (3) Conners’ Continuous Performance Test-2nd Edition (CPT-II), (4)
Wide Range Assessment of Memory and Learning 2 (WRAM L2), (5) Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children #lV (WlSC—IV), (6) Developmental Neuropsychological Assessment-2nd
Edition (NEPSY—II), (7) Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF), (8) Test of
Visual Perceptual Skills 3rd Edition (TVPS), (9) Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule
(ADOS), (10) Social Response Scales-Znd Edition (SRS), (11) Achenbach Child Behavior
Checklists (CBCL-TRF), (12) Conners’ Parent/Teacher Rating Scales- 3rd Edition, and (13)
Conners’ Teachers Rating Scale Long Form-Revised. (B-49)

22. The Parents ﬁlled out rating scales as provided by the evaluator. The Father stated he ﬁlled out
the rating scales questionnaires in relationship to the Student’s behaviors in school, not at
home. The F ather ﬁrst stated that this was the ﬁrst time he ﬁlled out a questionnaire. He was
not familiar with ﬁlling out questionnaires. The Father’s credibility was put in question by his
statement that he was aware of the behavioral rating scales completed by the Mother for the
April 25, 2010 PPT, and that he had previously completed behavior rating scales for the
February 10, 2012 PPT. The Parent informed Dr. Grayson that a nephew had Down Syndrome
and during the divorce proceedings he had taken Paxil. (Testimony of F ather, B-13, B-21, B-
23)

 

February 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15~0094

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

The evaluator obsewed the Student in his second grade general education class for 45 minutes.
During the observation, it was noted that the Student had issues staying on task, that he did not
attempt to catch up when he was not staying on task nor did he request assistance or question
what he might have missed. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson)

During the WISC-lV it was difﬁcult to maintain the Student on task and he needed more
positive reinforcements. During this testing, the Student lashed out and became aggressive. He
was difﬁcult to regroup and sustain his attention. The evaluator stopped the test. The overall
global processing speed (WISC—IV) was invalid. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson, B—49)

The CPT-II, a test of the Student’s attention/executive ability, was another test that the
evaluator marked as invalid. The Student was required to press the space bar for every letter
except X that appeared on the screen. He was unable to sustain his attention for the 14-15
minutes of the test. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson, B-49)

The evaluator was not able to assess the Student’s reading/decoding, mathematical, and written
language skills utilizing the Woodcock J ohnson Ill. The Student was resistant and non—
complaint. At times, he demonstrated threatening, aggressive behavior. The evaluator was of
the opinion that forcing the Student would give a false result. In standardization it is important
to follow strict protocol. Any change in testing would skew the results. The Student was able
to write numbers, and in reading, when the words became difﬁcult, he would stop. The
assessment was incomplete and invalid. (Testimony of Dr. Gi'ayson, B-49)

Dr. Grayson diagnosed the Student with Mixed Disturbance of Conduct and Emotions, Autistic
Disorder (requiring substantial support) and Academic 0r Education Problems. The doctor was
of the opinion that the Student’s negative behaviors have a signiﬁcant impact on his daily
functioning over multiple domains and impede his ability to engage appropriately with peers
and develop relationships. The comorbidity of ADHD or a Generalized Anxiety Disorder was
not sufﬁcient to warrant a formal independent diagnosis. (B-49)

The rating scales were explained to the Father. The F ather’s inability to properly complete the
rating scales that were provided to him did not change the Evaluator’s impression that the
Student is autistic. Dr. Grayson’s contract for the evaluations required him to provide the
District with the evaluation and not discuss it with anyone outside the District without prior
authorization. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson, P-67, B-59)

Dr. Grayson made the following recommendations:

a. Placement in less structured setting, and if the Student continues not making adequate
progress, placement should be changed to a more highly structured setting which offers
a multi-disciplinary cun'iculum.

b. Continuation of formal speech and language therapy.

c. Provide the Student with a consistent schedule of daily assignments with clearly deﬁned
instructions. This will address his executive ﬁmctioning difﬁculties.

d. The school psychologist should continue to develop and modify a behavioral program
based on the FBA and this evaluation.

e. Due to his limited self—monitoring abilities and help refusal, any and all modiﬁcations
should be consistently monitored for compliance and/or usage.

(B-49)

5

 

February 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0094

30.

31.

32.

33.

The Evaluator also provided the Parents with generalized instructions recommending a
psychiatric assessment to rule out Intermittent Explosive Disorder and/or Unspeciﬁed Bipolar
Disorder and Related Disorder. The Evaluator recommended Psychopharmacological
intewentions and coordinated clinical care in which he can receive long-term psychotherapy.
(B-49)

The Evaluator made generalized recommendations for the Student in his evaluation. These
recommendations would be brought to the PPT where he would listen to the team discussions.
When he presents to the team, in response to the discussions, he would then make more speciﬁc
recommendations. This is his usual practice. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson)

The Parents and their advocate disagreed with the neuropsychological evaluation performed by
Dr. Grayson. They were concemed with the factual information in the report. They did not
agree with family history statements and that the Student’s behavioral/motivational and
academic difﬁculties date back to pre-school. The Parents contend that the Student did not
have behavioral difﬁculties until second grade. (Testimony of F ather, B-54)

On November 5, 2014, Dr. Cristina Ciocca provided the Parents with her evaluation of the
Student. This evaluation was not reviewed by the PPT. The standard for her evaluations is a
full day observation but less than a full day does not invalidate the report Testing protocols for
testing the Student call for no one to be present during the testing, but when Student displayed
difﬁculties, Dr. Ciocca entered the room to encourage the Student to continue. When the
Student was difﬁcult and she was getting no data, she uses, “the Boston Approach”: coax the
Student by motivating him. If she did not coax the Student, he might not have completed the
test and she would have had to write “test not completed” as Dr. Grayson did in his evaluation.
(Testimony of Dr. Cristina Ciocca) A change in standardization skews results because the
Student is doing something he cannot do. (Testimony of Dr. Grayson)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW and ARGUMENT:

1.

It is undisputed that the Student is eligible for special education and related services as set forth
in IDEA, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1401, et seq. FAPE is deﬁned as special education and related
services that are provided at public expense, meet the standards of the state educational agency,
include an appropriate school education, and that are provided in conformity with the IEP. (20
U.S.C. §1401(8)).

The Board ﬁled this request for due process in accordance with the provisions of 34 C.F.R.
Section 302.502(b)(2) which provides that, “[I]f a parent requests an independent evaluation at
public expense, the public agency must, without unnecessary delay,.. i) [ﬂile a due process
request to show that its evaluation is appropriate,” if the parents’ request is not granted. The
sole issue to be determined in this matter is whether the Board’s evaluation is appropriate.

In determining the standard of appropriateness of the evaluation, IDEA regulations provide
standards for the manner in which evaluations are to be conducted. These standards are set
forth in 34 C.F.R. §300.300 to 34 C.F.R. §300.3ll. Connecticut regulations implement IDEA
regulations in R.C.S.A. §10—76d-9a(a).

 

February 18, 2015 F inal Decision and Order Case No. 15—0094

4. In reviewing the standard of appropriateness of an evaluation, the focus is on whether the
evaluation (1) used a variety of essential tools; (2) was administered by trained, knowledgeable,
and qualiﬁed personnel; (3) was administered and conducted under standard conditions and in
accordance with instructions provided by the producer of the assessments; (4) incorporated
information from various sources such as classroom observations and review of existing data;
and (5) whether the independent evaluation would provide any new or additional information.
Warren G. v. Cumberland County School Disirict, 190 F.3d 80, 87 (3rd Cir. 1999)

5. The Parents alleged that facts in Dr. Grayson’s report were incorrect. (Findings of Fact N0. 32)
The Student’s behavioral outbursts were prevalent in the second grade, but his motivation and
academic difﬁculties were notable throughout his educational history. (Findings of Fact Nos.
2, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 10) Parental statements of a familia1history of Down syndrome and a Parental
need of Paxil (even for a short time) are something that would be noted in the Student’s history
in an evaluation.

6. The evaluation performed by Dr. Grayson was not appropriate. One of the main issues that
were to be addressed in the evaluation was the Student’s current academic abilities. This was
not clearly addressed in the eva1uation. (Findings of Fact No. 19) Dr. Grayson e1ear1y had
difﬁculties eliciting responses from the Student. The Student’s behavior did not permit Dr.
Grayson to receive valid responses from three of the assessments utilized. (Findings of Fact
Nos. 24, 25 and 26) The recommendations present in the Neuropsychological eva1uati0n were
generalized recommendations that were to be expanded during the dialog at the PPT. This
dialog did not occur. (Findings of Fact No. 31) Any additional or new information that is
obtained from the evaluation is supposed to be contained in the evaluation. This evaluation is a
document that follows the Student during the course of his entire educational experience. It is a
document which any school staff member, Parent or future evaluator should be able to review
and to determine what has previously been recommended for the Student. The PPT only
memorializes part of what occurs during the meeting and much of the dialog that occurs is not
recorded. Generalizing reconnnendations that later can be expanded in response to the team’s
discussions does not provide a clear blueprint to address the Student’s educational, social or
emotional needs in order to provide guidance for the Student’s educational experience.

7. Dr. Ciocca’s evaluation of the Student was not utilized in this decision. The evaluation was
obtained when the Parents decided to cha11enge the neuropsychological eva1uation performed
by Dr. Grayson. Her report was not reviewed by the PPT and was obtained months after the
“window” of this hearing and therefore w0u1d be retrospective evidence. R.E. v. New York
City Department of Education, 59 IDELR 241 (2d Cir. 2012). The issues presented for this
hearing were: Whether the neuropsychological evaluation performed by the Board was
appropriate? If not; Should the Board conduct an independent neuropsychological evaluation at
public expense? Assessments derived by Dr. Ciocea’s evaluation are not for the review of this
hearing ofﬁcer in this hearing and were not assessed to determine the appropriateness of the
eva1uation.4 This hearing is not about a comparison of evaluations to determine whose
assessment is better.

4 Dr. Ciocea’s use of coaxing the Student to elicit answers puts into question the validity of the results of her evaluation.
There was no clariﬁcation of how much coaxing was done, if there was a cutoffperiod to the coaxing and if this a valid
exemption to the protocols of the assessments. Dr. Ciocca’s testimony did not present any evidence stating that “The
Boston Approach” (Findings of Fact No. 30) is a valid exemption to the protocols of assessments. (Testimony of Dr.
Grayson) '

7

 

February 18, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0094

8. T0 the extent a procedural claim raised by the Parent is not speciﬁcally addressed herein, the
Hearing Ofﬁcer has concluded that the claim lacked merit.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:
1. The neuropsychological evaluation conducted by the Board is not appropriate.

2. The Board shall pay for the independent neuropsychological evaluation of the Student.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing officer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Hearing Oft‘ 8e18ignature

  

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

