May 28, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0369

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney Melanie Dunn

Andrew Feinstein, Attorney at Law, LLC
86 Denison Avenue
Mystic, CT 06355

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby Wadler

Town of Greenwich
101 F ield Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1.

9.

Did the Board Violate “Child Find” by failing to ﬁnd the Student eligible to receive special
education and related services as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (IDEIA)?

Was the program provided by the Board for the 2013-2014 school year appropriate and did it
provide the Student with a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive
environment (LRE)?

Is the program provided by the Board for the 2014-2015 school year appropriate and does it
provide the Student with FAPE in the LRE?

Does the unilateral placement at Winston Academy for the 2014-2015 school year provide the
Student with a meaningful education?

Should the Board reimburse the Parents for their unilateral placement of the Student at Winston
Academy for the 2014-2015 school year?

Did the Board commit procedural violations by not allowing the Parents to be meaningful
palticipants in the PPT?

Should the Board reimburse the Parents for their psychiatric evaluation of the Student by
Roumen Nikolov M.D.?

Should the Board reimburse the Parents for their neuropsychological reevaluation of the Student
by Lauren Riordan M.D.?

Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of FAPE?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student is not identiﬁed as entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in the IDEIA 20 U.S.C. §1401 et
seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting,

 

May 28, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0369

the Parents rejected the Board’s ﬁnding that the Student was not eligible to receive special education and
related services. The Parents requested that the Student be identiﬁed as eligible. The Board refused the
Parents’ request.

On F ebruary 26, 2015, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. The parties
agreed to forego a resolution meeting and mediate the matter. The mediation date was March 16, 2015.
An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on February 20, 2015 and a pre—hearing conference was held
on March 3, 2015. Hearing dates of May 1 and 12, 2015 were chosen by the parties.

In an electronic transmission, the parties requested that the hearing dates be cancelled in order to give
the parties additional time to resolve the matter without going to due process. In an electronic
transmission, the Parents’ attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter had been resolved and an
agreement had been executed. The Parents’ attorney stated that the matter was withdrawn with
prejudice.

The mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended in order to accommodate the panies’
mediation. The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order is June 11, 2015.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE

 

Ifthe local or regional board of edueation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereqf, the State Board ofEducati'on shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either patty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

    
  

/ \
Healing OfmgtiSi'gnamre

‘Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

 

