December 22, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15-0158

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Manchester Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103—1919

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Surrogate Parent, Pro Se

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F . Bird, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Is the Student entitled to an independent neuropsychological evaluation at public expense?
2. Is the Student entitled to an independent psycho—educational evaluation at public expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Manchester Board of Education requested a special education hearing in the above—captioned matter
on September 19, 2014 in response to the Student’s request for an independent educational evaluation.
This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on September 19, 2014. A telephonic
pre—hearing conference was conducted on October 3, 2014. The Student’s Sun‘ogate Parent appeared on
behalf of the Student and Attorney Linda Yoder appeared on behalf of the Manchester Board of
Education. Hearings were scheduled for December 5 and December 18, 2014. In addition, the deadline
for mailing the Final Decision and Order was established to be October 31, 2014.

On October 24, 2014, Counsel for the Board of Education submitted a written request for a thirty-day
postponement and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision. The
Surrogate Parent did not object to the requested postponement, and it was granted.

On November 20, 2014, Counsel for the Board of Education reported that the parties reached a
settlement and requested additional time to ﬁnalize the documentation of the settlement. The Sm‘rogate
Parent consented to the request, and the hearing date of December 5, 2014 was cancelled. On December
18, 2014, the Board of Education 1'ep01ted that the dispute had been resolved, and requested that the case
be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board of Education’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@PW

Hearing Okfﬁcer Signature

ﬁprg'RD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

