J anuary 16, 2015 Final Decision and Order Case No. 15-0291

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. New Britain Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Surrogate Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Alyce L. Alfano
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the Student’s behavior a manifestation of his disability? If not;

2. Is maintaining the Student’s current placement substantially likely to result in injury to the
Student or to others? If so ;

3. Should the Student be returned to the placement from which he was removed?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Speciﬁc Learning Disabilities and is entitled to receive FAPE as
deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq.
and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the
Surrogate Parent rej ected the ﬁnding that the Student’s behavior was not a manifestation of his
disability. The Surrogate Parent requested that the Student be returned to the placement from which he
was removed. The Board refused the Parent’s request.

On December 23, 2014, the Board received notice of the Surrogate Parent’s request for due process. The
parties agreed to a resolution session. The date of the resolution session was December 29, 2014. An
impaitial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on December 22, 2014 and a pre—hearing conference was held
on December 24, 2014. This was an expedited hearing. A hearing date of January 20, 2015 was chosen
by the parties. On December 30, 2014, in an electronic transmission, the Surrogate Parent advised the
hearing ofﬁcer that the parties were able to resolve the matter and it was being withdrawn with
prejudice. The Board agreed with the Parent’s attorney’s request. The withdrawal was granted. The date
for mailing the Final Decision and Order is February 20, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

   

Hearing Offigeggignamre

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

