June 30, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0432

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Stamford Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Gerry McMahon, Esq.
Law Ofﬁces of Gerry McMahon, LLC
98 Mi11Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT 06811

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Christopher Tracey, Esq.
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
200 Atlantic Street
Stamford, CT 06901

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

Was there an IEP in place at the beginning of the school year?

Did the Board promptly convene a PPT to develop an IEP for Student?
Did the Board provide FAPE to Student?

If not, is ECDS an appropriate placement for Student?

If so, should the parents be reimbursed for their payment of tuition and
education related expenses?

6. Do the circumstances warrant an award of compensatory education?

P‘PP‘E‘JT‘

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on April 1, 2015.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on the same day and conducted a Prehearing
Conference on April 10, 2015. The hearing was scheduled for June 2, 2015. The Board
requested a postponement to investigate additional allegations raised by the Parents’ reply
to the Board’s answer to the Due Process Complaint. The Hearing Ofﬁcer conducted a
second Prehearing Conference and granted a postponement and an extension of the mailing
date of the Final Decision to July 10, 2015. The hearing was rescheduled to June 24 and
June 25, 2015. At the hearing of June 24, 2015, the parties reported that they had come to
an agreement and that the Parent was withdrawing the Due Process Complaint with
prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcei within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enfoice the
ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing officer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

W

HgaﬁngVOfﬁcer Signature

Svlvia Ho .
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

