July 21, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0579

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Monroe Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Marsha B. Moses, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Is the Psychiatric Evaluation conducted by the Board appropriate? If not;
2. Should the Board conduct an Independent Educational Evaluation at public expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Emotional Disturbance and is entitled to receive a free and
appropriate public education (F APE) as deﬁned in IDEA 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rej ected the Psychiatric Evaluation
conducted by the Board. The Parents requested an Independent Educational Evaluation. The
Board denied the Parents’ request and ﬁled for due process.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 11, 2015; a pre-hearing conference was held
on J une 22, 2015. A hearing date of July 20, 2015 was chosen by the parties. In an electronic
transmission dated July 13, 2015, the Parents advised the hearing ofﬁcer that they were
withdrawing their request for an Independent Educational Evaluation at public expense. Based
on the Pal‘ents’ withdrawal, the Board withdrew their request for due process.

The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is July 24, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the heating ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

     
 

I \ M
Hearing OftﬁviSiguamre

‘Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

