May 5, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0398

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Hartford Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Joel Rottner, Esq.
4 Hillsboro Drive
West Hartford, CT 06107
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Craig Meuser, Esq.
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Sylvia H0, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

,_.

Is the Student eligible for special education and related services?

2. Is the behavior that resulted in disciplinary action a manifestation of the
Student’s disability?

3. Is the behavior that resulted in disciplinary action a result of the Board’s failure

to provide an appropriate program for Student?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Surrogate Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on March
5, 2015. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on March 10, 2015 and conducted a
Prehearing Conference on March 26, 2015. At the Prehearing Conference, both parties
reported that they had an agreement in principle and that a settlement agreement would be
drafted and reviewed. On May 4, 2015, the Parent’s attorney reported to the Hearing
Ofﬁcer that the parties had executed their agreement and that the Parent was withdrawing
the Due Process Complaint.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

 

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after'
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescriptibn of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the heating decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state. or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

WW

 

 

He’aﬁné/Ofﬁcer Signature
Sylvia H0 A
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Flint

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

