December 17, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15—0154
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl V. Westport Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Phillip Cohn
Goldman Gruder & Woods LLC

200 Connecticut Avenue
Norwalk, CT 06854—1964

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attomey Marsha Moses
Berchem Moses & Devlin PC

75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney via
Letter dated September 16, 2014.2 It was received by the Board of Education (“BOB”) on September 16. The
30-day resolution period ended October 16 and the original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was
November 30. A telephonic pre—hearing conference was held on September 30. Attorney Cohn appeared on
behalf of Student and Attorney Moses appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education provide Student With a free appropriate public education during the 2014-
15 school year?

2. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education during the 2014
extended school year?

3. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student with an individualized education program at the
start of the 2014-15 school year?

4. Did the Board of Education fail to provide appropriate referrals for out-of—district placements?

5. Shall Student be placed at Logan River Academy at the Board of Education’s expense?

The parties participated in mediation on November 6. The case did not resolve during mediation.
Hearing was scheduled for November 18. The hearing was convened on the record at which time the parties
jointly requested that the hearing be postponed to allow them to reduce a settlement agreement to writing and
ﬁnalize ceitain outstanding provisions. The parties also jointly requested that the deadline to mail the ﬁnal
decision and order be extended to accommodate a later hearing date in the event that they did not ﬁnalize a
settlement agreement.

After fully considering the positions of the parties, the requests were granted on the record. The deadline
to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until December 30. Hearing was scheduled for December 9.

Via e—mail dated December 8, Student’s Attorney indicated that the parties had reached an agreement
and would be executing a formal agreement within 24 hours and requested that the request for due process
hearing be dismissed with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed With prejudice.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 U.S.C, §
1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CF R § 99, this decision uses “Student”, “Parents”, “School” and titles of school staff
members and certain other witnesses in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2014 unless otherwise indicated.

 

r
' .4.

If the local or regional board ofoducation or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
fproviding special education for tho student requiring special education does not take
action on thc ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁar
receipt thereof, the Stat'e Board of Educanou shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

. Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-madc to state or federal
court by cithcr party in accprdance With the provisions ofSection 4—183, Connecticut
Gcnqral Statutes, and Title 20 United States'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

learin;‘ mug Ofﬁcer Signature

31“:le c . QERWAN

. Heéring Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

signpnge. doc (ho wk)“
4/1/04

 

 

