October 4, 2014 F inal Decision and Order 15-0001

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Fairﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attorney Jennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing on behalf of the Department Attorney Ralph E. Urban

Of Developmental Services Assistant Attorney General
55 Elm Street, PO. Box 120
Haitford, CT 06141—0120

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

Pre—hearing Issues:

1. Are all of the proper Paities presented in this complaint? Are there Parties (i.e. DSS; DDS)
that can/may be required to be impleaded as necessary Parties?
2. Consent to represent the Student for the Parents and/or Counsel.

Issues for Hearing:

1. What is the proper pendency placement for the Student during the course of this complaint
and who is responsible for the payment of that placement?

2. Did the F airﬁeld Board of Education (“Board”) fail to provide the Student with a free and
appropriate public education (“FAPE”) as of June 26, 2014, inclusive of the extended school
year for the summer of 2014?

3. What would be the appropriate program and placement for this Student (residential vs. day
, program)?

4. Does the Student require an extended school year program?

 

October 4, 2014 Final Decision and Order 15-0001

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parents ﬁled this complaint on July 1, 2014. A prehearing conference was held on July 3,
2014 from which the issues listed above were identiﬁed for hearing. A preliminary hearing was
held to resolve the issue of joinder of additional parties. The Fairﬁeld Board of Education
(“Board”) ﬁled a Motion to Join the Department of Children and Families (“DCF”) and the
Department of Developmental Services (“DDS”) as necessary parties in this matter. Both
Agencies subsequently objected to being brought into the matter; the Parents took no position. A
hearing regarding the Motion for Joinder was held on July 29, 2014, the results of which
dismissed DCF as a necessary party and joined DDS as a necessary party. (Hearing Ofﬁcer
Decision on the Motion for J oinder dated October 4, 2014) DDS ﬁled a Motion to Reconsider,
citing primarily that the Hearing Ofﬁcer did not have authority to join DDS as a Party and as
such, should reconsider the order. The Motion to Reconsider was not formally acted upon as the
Parties reached agreement prior to the hearing set for that Motion on September 26, 2014. The
Parties requested an extension of the hearing date to allow DDS to obtain and review the
documents relative to this matter. The hearing date was extended to July 29, 2014. After the
hearing for joinder, a fu1ther hearing date was set for September 22, 2014. The Parties requested
an extension of the hearing date and the ﬁnal decision and order date. The hearing date was
rescheduled to September 26, 2014, and the ﬁnal decision and order date was extended to
October 15, 2014. On September 25, 2014, at approximately 7:00 PM, the hearing ofﬁcer was
notiﬁed by Counsel for the Parents that an agreement had been reached by the Parties. Given the
short notice of the agreement, the hearing date set for September 26, 2014 was held to allow the
Parties to both put the acceptance of an agreement on the record, and to allow any dissenting
Parties the opportunity to voice an objection. The hearing was held on September 26, 2014. The
signatory palties voiced their acceptance of the agreement (Parent’s Counsel did so through
communication with the Hearing Ofﬁcer and conﬁrmation by Counsel for the Board); Counsel
for DDS stated for the record that while not a signatory on the Agreement, they were accepting
the principle and resolutions in the Agreement; they also reiterated their objection to being made
a party to the matter.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The Parents, through counsel, have requested that this matter be withdrawn with prejudice. All
Motions ﬁled that were not heard or decided, are denied. With no further issues to be decided,
this matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

. If the local or regional boa'rd ofeducatl‘on or the
providing Special education for the student requiu'ng special education does not take

action on the ﬁndings or p'rescription of thc hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer
receipt'tbereof, the State Board ofEducaﬁon shall take appropriate action to enforce the
fmdiqgs or pzbscriptlod ofﬂxe hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hcaring ofﬁcer may be made to'statc or fcdéxal
court by cithcrparty in accordance with the provis'ions of Sccn'on 4-183, Connecticut
Gcncral Statutes, and Title 20, United States Codc 1415(1‘)(2)(A). . . '

  

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signamrc

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name ,in Print

'Imiﬁed school district responsible for '

 

