February 26, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0015

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Enﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Christina Ghio
The Law Ofﬁce of Christina Ghio
PO. Box 186
Cheshire, CT 06410

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinm' & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education offer the Student at free appropriate public education from June 2010 to
the present, including extended school years?

2. Did the Board of Education commit procedural Violations that resulted in a denial of a free
appropriate public education to the Student from June 2010 to the present, including extended school
years?

3. If the Student was denied a free appropriate public education, should the Board of Education place
the Student at The May Institute or River Street School?

4. If the Student was denied a free appropriate public education, is the Student entitled to
compensatory education, and if so, what would Characterize such compensatory education program
(duration, nature)?

5. Is the Student entitled to reimbursement for the expense of physical therapy, occupational therapy,
speech and language therapy, hippotherapy, home based ABA therapy, and/or social skills groups?

6. What is the appropriate identiﬁcation for the Student?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing on July 8, 2014. This Impartial Hearing
Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on July 9, 2014. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was
conducted on J uly 22, 2014. Attorney Christina Ghio appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney
Christine Chinni appeared on behalf of the Enﬁeld Board Of Education. The deadline for completing the
hearing and ﬁling the ﬁnal decision was established to be October 7, 2014. Evidentiary hearings were
scheduled for September and October 2014. Later, additional hearings were scheduled through
December 2014.

 

February 26, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0015

On October 1, 2014, Counsel for the Student requested a thirty—day postponement and extension of the
timeline to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision. Counsel for the Board of Education agreed
to the request, and it was granted. Additional extensions of the timeline were requested and granted
without objection through February 27, 2015.

On February 24, 2015, the Student reported that the dispute had been resolved, and requested that the
case be dismissed with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed with
prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@PW

Hearing Oﬁcer Signature

H7010 FKIRD

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

