July 7, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0507

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Enﬁeld Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education implement all services, including speech and language services, as
provided in the Student’s individual education program during the 2014-15 School Year?

2. If not, is the Student entitled to reimbursement of expenses incurred for such services, compensatory
education services or other appropriate relief?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in the above—captioned matter on May 11,
2015. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on May 12, 2015. A telephonic pre-hearing
conference was scheduled for, and attempted on June 4, 2015. The Student, however, did not appear.

A second pre-hearing conference was scheduled for J uly 2, 2015. Again, the Student did not appear.

Later in the day on J uly 2, 2015, the Student reported that the dispute had been ﬁnally resolved, and
requested that the case be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@PW

Heating Oﬁcer Signature

fprpgmb

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

