September 9, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0384

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student] V. Hartford Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Mother, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christine L. Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s
Mother Via Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing dated Febwary 17, 2015.2 The
Board of Education (“BOB”) received the Request for Hearing on March 2.

On March 5, BOE timely ﬁled a Sufﬁciency Challenge. The undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer
held that the Request for Hearing was deemed insufﬁcient and granted Student leave to amend
the Request for Impaltial Special Education Hearing by April 9. On April 8, Student’s Mother
ﬁled a document titled “Information for the Decision Re: Sufﬁciency Determination and
Orders.” This ﬁling was treated as a timely amendment of and supplement to Student’s initial
Request for Hearing.

Via e-mail dated April 9, BOE’S Attorney renewed its sufﬁciency challenge. The two-
part (initial and supplemental) Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing was deemed
sufﬁcient. The ease timelines reset with the ﬁling of the supplemental amendment. The 30—day
resolution period ended May 8 and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was set as
June 22.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was scheduled for April 20 but neither party
appeared. The pre-hearing conference was rescheduled for and held on May 4. Student’s Mother
appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney Chinni appeared on behalf of BOE.

At the pre—hearing conference, Student’s Mother indicated her intention to retain an
attorney and requested a 30—day extension of the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order to
allow her to retain an attorney. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request
was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended to July 22.

The following issues were identiﬁed for hearing:3

I In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U,S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student” and
“Student’s Mother” in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2015 unless otherwise indicated,

3 During discussion to clarify the issues, Attorney Chinni indicated that following the pre-hearing conference she
would send the Hearing Ofﬁcer and Student’s Mother the date of the current Individualized Education Program

1

 

1. Is the Individualized Education Program (“IEP”) in place for Student as of May 4,
2015 appropriate?

2, Did the Board of Education provide Student’s Parents with a meaningful opportunity

to participate in the IEP process?

3. If the answer to Issues One or Two above are in the negative, what shall be the

remedy?

Via Memorandum and Orders dated May 18, the parties were notiﬁed that witness lists
and exhibits must be exchanged by the parties and provided to the Hearing Ofﬁcer no later than
ﬁve business days prior to a scheduled hearing date. They were also notiﬁed that “[i]f Student
does not ﬁle its witness list and exhibits ﬁve business days in advance of the scheduled hearing,
they must notify the Hearing Ofﬁcer of the status of the case and make appropriate requests for
scheduling or the case will be dismissed for failure to prosecute.”

On May 23, a healing was scheduled for July 9. The hearing date was cancelled when
Attorney Chinni indicated that she was not available.

Via e-mail on June 17, BOE’s Attorney indicated that Student’s Mother had not
contacted her regarding mediation or a resolution session and stated that she moved to dismiss
the case for failure to prosecute. BOE’s Attorney’s motion did not include a memorandum of law
as required by Connecticut Regulation 10-76h-8. Regardless of that procedural deﬁciency, the
motion was considered and denied.

A hearing was scheduled for June 30. The parties failed to ﬁle their witness lists and
exhibits ﬁve business days in advance (J une 23) as required by law and by the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s
Orders. In response to the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s inquiry as to why she did not ﬁle a witness list and
exhibits, on June 25 Student’s Mother indicated that she was hospitalized and completely bed-
ridden until further notice.

On June 27, the Hearing Ofﬁcer indicated sympathy to Student’s Mother’s medical
condition and inability to attend the hearing and presented Student’s Mother with the options to
request a reasonable extension 01' to withdraw her request for Due Process without prejudice
subject to reﬁling when her medical condition allowed her to participate (subject to the two year
statute of limitations).

On July 7, Student’s Mother indicated in writing the nature of her medical issues and
requested an extension of time to deal with her medical issues and get the case in order. After
fully considering the positions of the patties, the request for an extension of time was granted
and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until August 21, 2015.

On August 9, Student’s Mother indicated that she was bedridden but that she “can and
would be available in the next 30 days.” Student’s Mother’s e-mails indicating her availability
were treated as a request for an extension of the mailing date. After fully considering the
positions of the panties and the circumstances, the request for an extension was granted and the
deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until September 18.

In the August 16 Order extending the mailing date, Student’s Mother was reminded that
the parties had to submit their witness lists and exhibits no later than ﬁve business days prior to a
scheduled hearing date and that if she does not timely respond to order 01' continues to be
unavailable due to her medical condition, the case will be dismissed without prejudice for failure
to prosecute. She was fuither informed that, if the case is dismissed for failure to prosecute, it

 

(“IEP”) that is in place. Attorney Chinm' did not supply the information even after follow—up request of the Hearing
Ofﬁcer.

will be dismissed without prejudice, which means that Student’s Mother can re-ﬁle the case as
soon as she is available to participate and present evidence and that she will have up to two years
from the date that she claims BOE violated Student’s rights to re-ﬁle the case.

Via Notice of Hearing dated August 19, a hearing was scheduled for September 14. In
that notice, the parties were reminded that “[w]itness lists shall be exchanged by the parties and
provided to the Hearing Ofﬁcer no later than ﬁve business days prior to the scheduled hearing
date” and that “[a]ll documentary evidence shall be disclosed to the other party and the Hearing
Ofﬁcer at least ﬁve business days prior to the scheduled hearing date.” The notice also stated that
“[i]f Student does not ﬁle its witness list and exhibits ﬁve business days in advance of the
scheduled hearing, they must notify the Hearing Ofﬁcer of the status of the case and make
appropriate requests for scheduling or the case will be dismissed for failure to prosecute.”

Due to the Labor Day holiday, witness lists and exhibits were due on or before Friday,
September 4. As of Tuesday, September 8, neither party had ﬁled witness lists or exhibits and
Student’s Mother had made no request for alternative scheduling.

T hroughout this case, Student’s Mother was repeatedly informed that she must ﬁle her
witness list and exhibits 0r notify the Hearing Ofﬁcer of the status of the case and make
appropriate requests for scheduling or the case will be dismissed for failure to prosecute.
Throughout the pendency of this hearing, the Hearing Ofﬁcer has been very clear as to the
consequences of Student’s Mother’s failure to comply with orders.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer has made every effort to inform Student’s Mother of the process
and expectations for her to move her case forward and to avoid having it dismissed for failure to
prosecute. Throughout the pendency of these proceedings, both paities have been non-responsive
to certain of the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s orders and requests. Student’s Mother has been given ample
opportunity to participate in this case but has apparently been unable to as a result of her current
medical condition. She has failed to adequately prosecute the case.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed without prejudice for
failure to prosecute.

 

.r

‘ ‘ ifthc local or regional boatd of education or the uniﬁed school district rcsﬁonsible for

"providing special education for the student requin'ng spcéial edlication does not take

I gotten on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days aﬁcr

receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take approprinte action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prpscription of the hearing ofﬁccr. .

Appeals ﬁ'om the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal

‘ court by either party in accprdancc with the provisidns of Section 4-183, Counccucut
Gcnqral Statutcs, and Titlc 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

garb: armg Ofﬁom' Signature

CYRN ‘3 C . ($511»va

. Heédng Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

