August 14, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0560

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Norwich Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Peter J . Maher
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education provide the small group instruction in reading and/or
mathematics as provided in the Student’s individualized education program?

2. If not, what relief is appropriate?

3. Did the Board Of Education provide speech pathology services as provided in the
Student’s individualized education program?

4. If not, what relief is appropriate?

5. Did the Board of Education offer the Student appropriate strategies, modiﬁcations and
accommodations in the area of Visual and auditory learning?

6. If not, what relief is appropriate?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

 

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter
on June 5, 2015. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on June 5, 2015. A telephonic
pre—hearing conference was held on June 26, 2015. The Student’s father appeared on behalf
of the Student and Attorney Peter Maher appeared on behalf of the Board of Education. The
deadline for ﬁling the ﬁnal decision was established to be August 14, 2015 and the
evidentiary hearing was scheduled for August 10, 2015.

On August 5, 2015, the Student reported that the parties had ﬁnally resolved their dispute, and
requested that the case be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@F/iv/

Hearing OfﬁEEr Signature

ﬂmj F 51(0)

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

