August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0516

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Region 7 Board of Education v. Student
Appeacing on behalf of the Parent: Parents Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Marsha Moses, Esq.
Berehem, Moses & Devlin, PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Is the Board’s psychoeducational evaluation appropriate?
2. Are Parents entitled to an independent educationa1 evaluation (“IEE”) at pub1ic expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request 011 May 18, 2015 and a Hearing
Ofﬁcer was appointed the same day. A Prehearing Conference was conducted on May 29, 2015.
The hearing convened on June 29, 2015 and July 17, 2015. On June 29, 2015, the Hearing
Ofﬁcer granted the palties’ request to extend the mailing date of the Final Decision from July 2,
2015 to July 31, 2015 to add the July 13, 2015 hearing date. The July 13, 2015 hearing date was
cancelled and rescheduIed to July 17, 2015. On July 17, 2015, the Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the
parties’ request for an extension of the mailing date of the Final Decision to August 28, 2015 in
order for the paities to submit briefs. Both parties submitted briefs on August 5, 2015.

The Board presented the testimony of three witnesses. They were Margaret Nelligan, Special
Education Teacher at Northwestern Regional Middle School; Quentin Rueckert, Executive
Director of Shared Services and Rosalind Leibowitz, School Psychologist. The Mother testiﬁed
on behalf of the Parents. The Board submitted as ful1 exhibits B—1 through B-37. The Parent
submitted as full exhibits via Student’s initials Exhibits 1-4, 7, 10-12, 21, 37 and 38. The
Parents’ Exhibits were labeled with Student’s initials and did not conform with the
Memorandum to Parties regarding1abeling. The Student’s initials are hereby substituted with
the letter “F” in this decision in order to maintain conﬁdentiality of Student’s identity. Parents
Exhibits 5.1, 5.2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 13-20, 22—36 and 39—46 were marked but not admitted as full
exhibits. The Board’s Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request was admitted as HO-l. During
the course of the hearing, the Hearing Officer requested that the Board produce copies of the
Student’s attendance records for the 2013—2014 and 2014-2015 school years. The Board
provided these as well as the Student’s ﬁnal report card for the 8‘h grade and they were 2111
admitted into the record as Exhibit HO-2.

 

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0516

This Final Decision and Order sets forth the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings of facts and
conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony and
are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was
considered in deciding this matter. T0 the extent the summary, procedural histmy and ﬁndings
of facts actually represent conclusions of law, they should so be considered and Vice Versa. SAS
Institute Inc. v. S & H Computer Systems, Inc, 605 F. Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie
Am F. Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. TeX. 1993).

SUMMARY:

Student was an 8“1 grade student who struggled with spelling throughout elementary school. In
the 6‘h grade, Student was diagnosed with a medical condition that required medical treatment
and testing. A 504 plan was deve10ped for missed classes due to the medical condition. In the
7‘h grade, Student received very low but passing grades. Classroom teachers referred Student to
Response to Intervention (“RTI”) at the beginning of 8‘“ grade for screening for reading
comprehension. The RTI facilitator perfomied the screening and referred Student to special
education for a suspected learning disability of Dyslexia. Student was evaluated and found
eligible for special education and related services. Parents challenge the evaluation on the
ground that it was not sufﬁciently comprehensive because it did not contain assessments for
other disabilities.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut Genei'a1 Statutes (C.G.S.) §10—
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §141 5(1) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4—176e to 4-
178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. Student was born on March 14, 2001. Student attended Barkhamsted Elementary School
until the 6th grade and the Board’s Northwestern Regional Middle School for the 7th and 8th
grades. The evaluation at issue in this hearing was an initial evaluation to determine
Student’s eligibility for specia1 education. It was conducted in the 2014—2015 (8th grade)
school year. As a result of the evaluation, the Student was determined to be eligible for
special education and related services under the category of Speciﬁc Learning
Disability/Dyslexia. (B—17, Testimony, Mother, Testimony, Nelligan, Testimony, Leibowitz,
Testimony, Rueckei't)

2. The academic record shows that beginning in the 3‘d grade, the Student had difficulty with
spelling and needed extra help in editing her written work and completing work in a timely
manner. It reveals no classroom teacher reports of problems with math concepts,
calculations, speech and language or handwriting. (B—14)

 

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0516

3. In the 5th grade at Barkhamsted Elementary School, the Mother made a referral to determine
Student’s eligibility for special education due to Student’s difﬁculties in spelling. A
Planning and Placement Team meeting (“PI’T”) was convened and evaluations were
conducted in academic achievement related to spelling, speech and language processing as
well as perceptual-motor integration. The evaluation revealed that Student was achieving
within the average range. No problems were noted in the speech and language evaluation.
The Barkharnsted Elementary School PPT determined that Student was not eligible for
special education. (Testimony, Mother, Testimony, Leibowitz)

4. Despite her difﬁculties with spelling, Student academically progressed from year to year.
She scored within the goal range in the Connecticut Mastery Tests (“GMT”) in Math,
Reading and Writing in 3rd, 4‘" and 5m grades, and at an advanced level for Science in 5th
grade. 0n the 6th grade CMTs, Student scored in the goal range for Math and Reading and in
the advanced range for Writing. (B-l, B-2, B—3 and B-l4)

5. In the 6‘h grade, Student was diagnosed with Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura, a
medical condition that necessitated absences from school to obtain required medical
treatment and testing. Barkhamsted Elementary School formed a 504/ADA accommodation
team (“504 Team”) and developed an individual accommodation plan (“504 plan”) that
provided academic support for missed content and other accommodations due to Student’s
medical condition. (B—6)

6. Student entered the Board’s middle school, Northwestern Regional Middle School, in the
2013—2014 school year as a 7th grader. A 504 team was formed in October of 7th grade and
developed a 504 plan. This team consisted of Mother, Student’s guidance counselor,
Rosalind Leibowitz, School Psychologist, the school nurse and teachers. The plan excused
the student from physical education and provided Student with academic support for skills,
counseling and consultation with the school nurse on an as needed basis immediately
following periods of absences. The plan also provided for accommodations for spelling. (B-
7)

7. In the 7m, grade year, Student was absent 25 times and tardy 18 times as a result of her
medical condition‘ The record is clear that absences signiﬁcantly impacted the Student’s
ability to learn new academic material and to keep up with peers. 7th grade classes were
scheduled on a rotational basis. Student missed all academic classes 25 times. In addition to
the absences, Student would miss as many as three morning classes when she was tardy. In
sum, Student missed as many as 43 instructional periods for some subjects during the 7‘h
grade. This would have amounted to anywhere between 20 to 25 percent of instructional
time when new topics and skills were being introduced and/or reinforced. (Testimony,
Mother, HO-2)

8. The 7‘h grade 504 plan included academic skills support and accommodations on an as
needed basis. Material that was introduced in school during the Student’s absence was
provided to Student to learn and study at home or at the hospital where Student was receiving
treatment. Teachers would then be available during Student’s study hall to tutor on academic
material she did not understand. Not surprisingly, Student struggled in all academic subjects.
Student’s academic struggles became a source of concern for both her parents and teachers.
(B—7, HO—2, Testimony, Mother, Testimony, Rueckert)

 

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—05 1 6

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

The Student’s ﬁnal grades at the end of 7th grade were as follows: Math 7 D; Skills seminar
7 B—: Reading 7 C+; Science 7 C; Chorus 7 A-; Social Studies 7 D+; Vo—Ag 7 A; Art — B—;
Business — D; English 7 C+. (B—S)

In September of 8th grade, the 504 plan was reviewed. The 8th grade 504 team added regular
education math tutoring each Thursday and extra help from teachers on Monday and
Thursdays. The purpose of the math tutoring was to reinforce skills that could be missed
during absences from school. Even students who are capable math students could fall behind
if these skills were not given adequate practice and support due to absences from the
classroom. (13—9, Testimony, Rueckert)

At Northwestern Middle School, Students were assigned to teams so that team teachers could
monitor student progress across all subjects. Student was assigned to Team Thunderbird for
7‘h and 8‘h grades At Team Thunderbird meetings, teachers discussed ongoing concerns that
the Student’s absences were impeding her ability to learn. They had also come to a
conclusion that Student had problems with reading comprehension and suspected that the
lack of reading comprehension might be a source of Student’s academic struggles in all
subjects. In mid-September of 2014, Team Thunderbird teachers made a referral to
Response to Intervention (“RTl”) due to these two concerns. (B-lO, Testimony, Nelligan,
Testimony, Leibowitz)

At the same time, the Mother had also expressed concerns about Student’s reading and
spelling problems during her meetings with teachers. (Testimony, Mother)

Student’s 7‘h and 8‘11 grade general education reading class teacher, Ms. Nancy Morehouse,
requested a screening for reading problems. (Testimony, Nelligan; Testimony, Mother)

Ms. Margaret Nelligan is a special education teacher and was the RTI facilitator for Team
Thunderbird. She attended Team Thunderbird meetings on a regular basis and was present
when teachers discussed the Student’s reading difﬁculties. She is a certiﬁed special
education teacher in the State of Connecticut and reading specialist assigned to Team
Thunderbird. She holds a Masters of Arts in Special Education and has been a teacher of
students with dyslexia and signiﬁcant learning disabilities since 2008. She has received
continuing professional development in a number of reading programs as well as in
adolescent literacy since 2008. As a special education teacher, she administers assessments
to approximately 10 to 12 students each year in the area of literacy. (Testimony, Nelligan, B—
37)

At Ms. Morehouse’s request, Ms. Nelligan conducted an informal assessment to screen for
reading problems. This informal assessment, called the Quantitative Reading Inventory
(“QRI”), tracked the Student’s ability to read words in isolation and in context; oral reading
ﬂuency; reading comprehension; reading rate in oral and silent reading and the ability to
pronounce words. The results of the QRl showed that Student did not know vowel sounds.
Student had trouble pronouncing words in isolation. She read at a rate far below that of same
aged peers. Based upon these results, Ms. Nelligan believed that a referral to special
education would be warranted to determine if Student would be eligible for special education
services under the category of Speciﬁc Learning Disability/Dyslexia. (Testimony, Nelligan)

Ms. Nelligan scheduled a meeting for the Mother and Thunderbird team teachers to review
the results of the QRl. During the course of this meeting on December 4, 2014, the

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0516

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

participants agreed that the meeting should be held as a PPT meeting to refer Student to
determine eligibility for special education services. The attendees of the meeting were the
special education administrator, Student’s math and general education reading teachers, the
school psychologist and Student’s guidance counselor. (Testimony, Nelligan, Testimony,
Mother, Testimony, Leibowitz, B-1 1, B—12)

At this meeting, Ms. Nelligan reviewed the Student’s QRI results. Ms. Nelligan expressed
concerns that Student did not know her vowel sounds and performed below same age peers
in reading ﬂuency. The participants discussed Student’s academic struggles. The Mother
recounted the Student’s historical struggles with spelling and reading. There was no
discussion among the PPT palticipants about any other suspected disabilities that may have
had an impact upon Student’s performance. (Testimony, Nelligan, Testimony, Mother,
Testimony, Leibowitz, B—l2)

The PPT proposed an initial evaluation. This evaluation would include psychological
assessments relating to cognitive and personality to be conducted by the school psychologist,
Ms. Leibowitz, and assessments relating to reading and written language to be conducted by
Ms. Nelligan. The Mother gave parental consent for the evaluation. (B—12)

Ms. Nelligan administered formal standardized diagnostic assessments. She administered the
Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing 2 (CTOPP-2), the Test of Word Reading
Efﬁciency 2 (TOWRE 2) and conducted an analysis of the Student’s curricular writing
samples. She also interviewed Student’s teachers about their observations. To conduct an
analysis of the Student’s writing, Ms. Nelligan obtained unedited writing samples from two
of the Student’s teachers that were in the Student’s own handwriting. (B-lS, Testimony,
Nelligan)

After interviewing teachers and reviewing the results of the diagnostic assessments and
writing samples, Ms. Nelligan concluded that the Student displayed a number of
characteristics consistent with the description of a student with dyslexia. For instance,
Student had trouble with phonological awareness and rapid naming of letters and digits. Her
auditory skills in hearing language were developed but she had a limited ability to manipulate
sounds or know what sounds were being made at which time. She could not identify or
decode words presented to her in isolation. She was not sure whether to apply a short 01' long
vowel sound to a word presented in isolation. She did not know when to apply a syllable.
Although the Student could read accurately, she read laboriously. Her laborious effort to
decode words impacted her ability to read ﬂuently. She read at a level and rate far below
what would have been expected from an 8m grader. While the assessments revealed
characteristics of dyslexia, the assessments did not reveal any characteristics of dysgraphia.
Dysgraphia is a writing disability. Some characteristics of dysgraphia could be detected in
reviewing handwriting and inability to produce large volumes of handwritten work. Student
is able to produce large volumes of handwritten work and did not have problems with
handwriting. (B—lS, Testimony, Nelligan)

Ms. Leibowitz conducted the psychological assessments of Student. The psychological
assessment was being administered to determine whether Student had any processing deﬁcits
that could have accounted for her academic difﬁculties and to rule out any social or

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0516

22.

23.

24.

25.

emotional factors that may have contributed to the Student’s school performance.
(Testimony, Leibowitz, B—l4)

Ms. Leibowitz has been a school psychologist since 1977 and a school psychologist for
Northwestern Region 7 since 2000. She has administered psychological assessments in the
school district for 15 years. (B—l4, Testimony, Leibowitz)

Ms. Leibowitz administered the Woodcock Johnson Tests of Cognitive Abilities HI
(Extended Version), a formal standardized test; Behavior Assessment System for Children H
(Self—Report Personality, Teacher and Parent Rating Scales) (“BASC II”), a standardized
inventory, and Sentence Completion Blank, another standardized measure. She reviewed the
Student’s academic records and conducted a clinical interview of Student. (B—l4, Testimony,
Leibowitz)

The review of the Student’s academic record and testing portrays a child who is a “deep
thinker” who has “wonderful background knowledge.” She struggled with spelling as well
as with the speed at which she processed information throughout her tenure in elementary
school. In the 5‘h grade, the Student had a speech and language assessment that showed that
Student was functioning in the average range and did not indicate any speech or motor
difﬁculties. Her cognitive testing showed a signiﬁcant scatter between her above average
and advanced cognitive strengths and her ability to process information. Her ﬂuid reasoning
(being able to assimilate new information), and thinking ability were above average to
advanced. She has a solid command of vocabulary and communication and has a strong
working memory. However, she performed at the lowest levels in tasks that required speed
and had time constraints. The testing was consistent with the spelling and reading difﬁculties
chronicled in school records. Neither school records not diagnostic testing revealed any
speech, motor or neurological impairments associated with dyspraxia, a neurological
speech/motor disability, nor any working memory problems associated with dyscalculia, a
math disability. (B~14, Testimony, LeibowitZ)

A PPT convened on February 25, 2015 to review the evaluation reports and to determine
eligibility and develop an IEP. In attendance were the school principal, Student’s regular
education teachers, including Ms. Morehouse, the regular education reading teacher, Ms.
Leibowitz, Ms. Nelligan, Ms. Teggi, a special education teacher, an intern and both parents.
The PPT reviewed teacher reports of the Student’s progress. The teachers all reported that
the tutoring provided by the 504 plan was helping and Student had improved academically,
Mother 1'ep01ted that Student’s medical condition had stabilized. Student’s math teacher
reported that Student was showing a deeper understanding of math concepts. Science and
social studies teachers reported that Student was doing better. Social studies teacher reported
that Student was a superior student, especially Verbally, and was a1ticulate and an “emerging
leader.” Ms. Leibowitz and Ms. Nelligan reported and discussed their review of records and
testing. The IEP states that while Student had a “strong work ethic; strong working memory’
and “background knowledge,” Student required specialized instruction because of her
“decreased reading ﬂuency due to difﬁculty decoding and comprehending at a pace
consistent with peers.” Due to Student’s difﬁculty in accurately and ﬂuently decoding
familiar and unfamiliar words, Student was unable to succeed in regular education classes
without special education classes without explicit, rnultisensmy reading instruction. The
PPT found that Student was functioning at age appropriate norms in the areas of math and
other academic areas; in behavior and socially and emotionally; in communication; in

a

6

 

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0516

26.

27.

28.

29.

ﬁne/gross motor areas and in other areas of daily living. With respect to health and
development, including Vision and hearing issues, the IEP notes that Student is age
appropriate but needed to continue to seek medically necessary health interventions and
attend multiple appointments due to her health condition. The PPT found that Student was
eligible for special education services as a student with a Speciﬁc Learning
Disability/Dyslexia. The PPT recommended that the Student receive direct reading
instmction. (Testimony, Nelligan, B—17)

A PPT convened on March 25, 2015 at the Parent’s request. Parents wanted to review the
Student’s program and to make requests for additional reading support. The members of the
PPT were: Quentin Rueckert, Executive Director of Shared Services, the Parents, Kevin
Daly, parent advocate, Ms. F antano, the Student’s general education math teacher, Ms.
Nelligan and Ms. Leibowitz. The members of the PPT discussed the Student’s transition to
special education. The Parents were concerned about the lack of intensity of the reading
program and Student’s upcoming transition to high school. During this PPT, the Parents
requested an additional period of direct, intense reading services. The PPT agreed to
reconvene another PPT in two weeks. (B-19, Testimony, Rueckeit)

Subsequently, a PPT was convened on April 9, 2015. The members of the PPT were the
Parents and their parent advocate, Kevin Daly, Mr. Rueekert, Ms. F antano, Ms. Nelligan, Ms.
Leibowitz, Bruce Miller, guidance counselor, and Kaye Sweeney, school nurse. The Parents
provided a privately obtained speech and language evaluation. Mr. Daly, on behalf of the
Parents, requested a neuropsychological evaluation. Mr. Rueckert asked for the reason for
the request. No explanation was given. Mr. Rueckeit consulted Ms. Leibowitz regarding her
opinion as to the necessity for a neuropsychological evaluation. Ms. Leibowitz opined that
she did not believe that one was necessary to plan or implement the IEP. Neveitheless, Mr.
Rueckert agreed to provide a neuropsychological evaluation at public expense. He testiﬁed
that he agreed to do this as a gesture of good will to the parents. The Mother testiﬁed that
she believed that she was requesting a publically funded Independent Educational Evaluation
(“IEE”) as was her right under the IDEA. Subsequent to the PPT, the Parents provided the
Board with a summary of their input and concerns and requested that this input be added to
the IEP. (8—22, B—23, Testimony, Mother)

After the April 9, 2015 PPT, Mr. Rueckert emailed the names of three neuropsychologists to
the Parents for consideration. Through a number of emails, the Parents rejected the Board’s
list and chose a different neuropsychologist. The emails reveal that Board and Parents had
differing views on the nature of the neuropsychologicaI evaluation being sought at the April
9 PPT. The Parents believed that by requesting an IEE, they were asserting their legal rights
under the IDEA. The Board believed that the Parent was making a request for additional
testing and that it agreed to provide this testing as an accommodation to Parents even though
the testing was not necessary to determining eligibility or developing an IEP. The Board
acted under this belief because the Parents never indicated any disagreement with the
Board’s evaluation. As of the time of the hearing, the Board continued to offer the Parents :1
neuropsychological evaluation to be conducted by a neuropsychologist from its list of
neuropsychologists. (Testimony, Rueckert, Testimony, Mother, B—22, P- 2, P-3)

A subsequent PPT was held on May 5, 2015 in which this miscommunication was discussed
and the parties’ positions were clariﬁed. Mr. Rueckert continued to offer to fund a

 

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0516

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

neuropsychological evaluation with the Board list. The Parents insisted on another
neuropsychologist of Parents’ choosing. (Testimony, Mother, Testimony, Rueckert)

On May 7, 2015, the Parents wrote the Board to inform the Board of their disagreement with
Board’s evaluation and request an Independent Educational Evaluation at public expense.
(13—31, Parent’s brief)

On May 18, 2015, the Board brought this Due Process Complaint/Request for Hearing.
(HO-l)

The Parents believe that the Board’s evaluation was inappropriate because it did not cover
other areas of testing. They believe that evaluations should have covered all areas of
learning, including the subject areas of reading, writing and math. In addition, the Parents
believe that the Board should have conducted separate assessments into other disabilities
such as dyscalculia and dyspraxia. The Parents believe that the Board should have evaluated
for other learning disabilities besides the suspected disability involving literacy. (Testimony
Mother, Parent’s post hearing brief)

Mother expressed her lack of conﬁdence in the competence of the Region 7 School Board’s
evaluation because of her experience with the Barkhamsted Elementary School PPT in the 5m
grade. The Barkhamsted Board of Education did not ﬁnd Student eligible for special
education even though Student had struggles with spelling and reading.

The Student continues to receive general education math tutoring from her math teacher.
This math tutoring was provided by Student’s 8‘" grade 504 plan. This math tutoring has
helped Student and her grades have improved dramatically without special education
instruction. Though Student has received high grades in math this year, Student will be
placed in a remedial math level for the 9th grade. Parents believe that since Student is
receiving math tutoring, Student could have a learning disability in math and should have
been evaluated for a math disability. Parents also believe that the Board should have
included all other learning disabilities and dyspraxia in its evaluation. (HO-Z, B—9,
Testimony, Mother)

After reviewing all of the evidence stated above, this Hearing Ofﬁcer ﬁnds that there is no
credible evidence of suspected disabilities in any area other than literacy. First, it is
signiﬁcant that Student’s teachers made the referral to special education. Thunderbird Team
classroom teachers made a referral to RTI because they observed that Student struggled with
reading in a general education classroom environment and discussed these concerns at team
meetings. Student’s reading teacher asked for screening for reading problems and the RTI
facilitator/special education teacher made the referral to special education. At the time of the
referral to special education, these teachers had already observed the Student in the general
education classroom environment for over an academic year. They suspected that her
academic struggles were due to 1) extended absences and 2) struggles with reading
comprehension. The teachers did not observe other problems. Their referral formed the
basis for the suspected disability. It is also signiﬁcant that classroom teachers paitieipated in
PPTs and/or provided information to the PPT. These classroom teachers were in the best
position to assess the Student’s strengths and weaknesses in the general education setting. (B—
10, B—1 1)

 

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0516

36.

37.

38.

Second, there is credible evidence in the record that Student’s poor performance in all areas
in the 7th grade could be attributed to the large number of absences and tardies necessitated
by her need for medical treatment and testing. Student was not present many times when
academic material was being introduced and/or reinforced. She was not able to learn the
material herself but she was struggling to do so with take home material and academic
support. She was always catching up with her peers because of these absences. This
situation improved dramatically in the 8‘h grade when Student absences reduced dramatically
and Student received regular tutoring. (HO—2)

Third, there is no credible evidence that Student had a math disability that contributed to her
low grades or need for remediation. Student’s math teacher repoited at the PPTs that Student
was able to grasp math concepts. The academic record does not reveal any stiuggles in math
such that special education would be required. Student has successfully progressed through
general education tutoring. Math is a complex subject that requires basic skills to be
developed before the acquisition of higher—level skills. It is likely that Student’s medically
necessitated absences have hampered and continue to hamper Student such that a remedial
level of math is necessary. (B—l9)

F inally, there is no credible evidence to suspect that Student has other disabilities. The
academic record does not reveal any ﬁne motor, speech or communication difﬁculties, or
impairments of written or oral expression so as to suspect other disabilities (B—l4)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

The purpose of the initial evaluation is to determine if the Student is a child with a disability
under §300.8 and eligible for special education and to determine the educational needs of the
child. 34 C.F.R. §300.301(c)(2)

In contrast to instinction in a general education classroom curriculum, “special education”
means “specially designed instinction, at no cost to the parents, to meet the unique needs of a
child with a disability.” See 34 CFR §300.39(a)(l). “Specially designed instruction” means
“adapting, as appropriate to the needs of an eligible child, content, methodology or delivery
of instruction to address the unique needs of the child that result from a child’s disability; and
to ensure access of the child to the general curriculum, so that the child can meet educational
standards within the jurisdiction of the public agency that apply to all children.” 34 C.F.R.
§300.39(b)(3)

The Student was suspected of being eligible for special education and related services under
the category of speciﬁc learning disability under 34 CFR §300.8(2)(c)(10) and speciﬁc
leaming disability/dyslexia under Connecticut Public Act 14—39. (Finding of Facts No. 14
and 35)

A child is determined to be eligible after an “appropriate” evaluation. An “appropriate”
evaluation is one that complies with IDEA and Connecticut regulations to produce
information to determine whether the student is eligible for special education services and to
develop the student's individualized education program (“IEP”). 34 CPR §300.301-
§300.305; R.C.SiA. See. lO-76d-9(a) and (b).

If a student receives an evaluation with which the parent disagrees, a parent has a right to an
independent educational evaluation (“IEE’) at public expense, which means at no cost to the

9

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0516

parent. 34 CFR. § 300.502, R.C.S.A Sec. 10-76d-9(c)(1) and (2). [fa parent requests an IEE
at public expense, the school district must, without unnecessary delay, ensure either an IEE is
provided at public expense or initiate an impartial hearing to show that its evaluation is '
appropriate or that the evaluation obtained by the parent does not meet the school district
criteria. 34 C.F.R.§ 300.502; R.C.S.A, Sec. 10-76d-9(e)(2). Parents’ entitlement to a
publicly funded TEE is conditioned on their disagreement with the Board’s evaluation. In
this case, Parents informed the Board that they disagreed with the Board’s evaluation on May
7, 2015. The Board ﬁled this Due Process Complaint about 10 days later. (F indings of F act
No. 30 and 31)

6. Parents challenge the Board’s evaluation as being inappropriate because it was not
sufﬁciently comprehensive. The steps for ensuring a comprehensive evaluation for a student
with a speciﬁc learning disability are summarized in Connecticut State Department of
Education’s publications “2010 Guidelines for Identifying Children with Learning
Disabilities” (“Guidelines”) and “Speciﬁc Learning Disabilities/Dyslexia Public Act 14—39
Frequently Asked Questions as Revised 3/15/2015” (“FAQs”)(published at SDE website).
These materials offer guidance in the “appropriate” evaluation of students suspected of
speciﬁc learning disabilities and compliance with federal and state regulations. 34 CFR
§300.301-§300.305; R.C.S.A. Sec. 10—76d-9(a) and (b).

7. ”To help ensure that an evaluation is comprehensive, the PPT must ﬁrst gather input from
multiple sources (e.g., families, general education classroom, curriculum—based
measures, standardized assessments, student records, observations) and include a review
of existing evaluation data to determine what additional data, if any, are needed to
identify a learning disability, a student‘s need for special education, and write an IEP.
Included in this review must be any evaluative data gathered during the SRBI
[scientiﬁcally research based intervention] process as we11 as other academic and
behavioral data that can be used to rule out that the student‘s learning difﬁculties are due
to a lack of appropriate instruction.” See Guidelines at page 27. See also answer to
“What is an appropriate evaluation for a child suspected of having SLD/Dyslexia?”
FAQS at p. 2. See also 34 CFR 300.305-307. The PPT ﬁrst met on December 4, 2014 to
gather parent and teacher input, as well as teacher observations and the results of the
QRI, which led to the suspicion that further data was necessaiy to determine whether
Student would be eligible for special education and related services. (F indings of Fact
Nos. 16, 17 and 18)

8. “If a review of existing data is not sufﬁcient to identify whether a student has a learning
disability, a comprehensive evaluation must be planned by the child's parents and the
members of the PPT that includes, among others, the student‘s regular education teacher,
at least one specialist qualiﬁed to conduct individual student diagnostic examinations
...(Connecticut State Regulations Section 10-76d—10 and 34 CPR §300.308 and 300.321)
and other qualiﬁed professionals as appropriate.” See Guidelines at p 27. The December
4, 2014 PPT included the Student’s classroom teachers, a school psychologist and a
special education teacher. Both were specialists who were qualified to conduct
diagnostic examinations in different educational ﬁelds. (Findings of Fact Nos. 14, 16,
17, 18, 19)

9. “When planning the evaluation, the PPT must: 1) use a variety of assessment tools and

10

August 25, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0516

10.

11.

12.

strategies to gather relevant functional, developmental and academic information about
the student, including information provided by the parents; 2) not use any single measure
or assessment as the sole criterion for determining whether the student is a student with a
disability; 3) use technically sound (i.e., valid and reliable) instruments that may assess
the relative contribution of cognitive and behavioral factors in addition to physical or
developmental factors; 4) use assessments that are tailored to assess areas ofspeciﬁc
educational need and not merely those that are designed to provide a general intelligence
quotient; 5) assess a student in all areas related to the suspected disability; and 6) use
measures that are sufﬁciently comprehensive to identify all of a student‘s special,
education and related service needs (34 CPR §§300.304[b]&[c]).” See Guidelines at
p. 27 and FAQs at p. 2. Ms. Leibowitz and Ms. Nelligan used a variety ofwidely
accepted assessments and gathered information from a number of different sources
to determine Student’s functioning in the area of suspected learning disability of
dyslexia. (Finding of Facts Nos. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24)

“Evaluations for a speciﬁc learning disability must consider input from families; any
educationally relevant medical ﬁndings; data relevant to exclusionaiy criteria (e.g.,
hearing screenings, Vision screenings, school attendance, determination of English
language proﬁciency if a student is an English language learner, documentation of
appropriate instruction); and information indicating whether the student's difﬁculties
require special education and related services.” See Guidelines at p. 27; See also 34 C.F.R.
§300.309 and R.C.S.A. Sec. 10—76d-9(b). The PPT discussed Student’s medical condition
and school attendance history and ruled out the large amount of absences as a cause of
reading comprehension problems. The Mother provided input to the PPT and described
Student’s history of problems with spelling and reading. Ms. Nelligan provided her input
based upon her experience as a special education teacher reviewing the QRI results that
Student might require special education services. (Findings of F act No. 17)

“When determining whether a student has a learning disability, the PPT must ensure
the student is observed in her or his learning environment, including the general
education classroom, to document the student's academic performance and behavior
in the areas of difﬁculty (34 CFR§300.310). Information may be used from an
observation that was obtained before a student's referral for an evaluation, 01' a member
of the PPT may conduct such an observation as palt of the initial evaluation after the
student has been referred.” Guidelines at p. 28; See also 34 C.F.R. §3001310. The PPT
reviewed information that included teacher observations in the general education setting.
In fact, the teachers who had conducted these observations made the referral to RTI,
which later resulted in the referral to special education. (Finding of Facts No. 11 and 35)

The Board’s evaluation was in compliance with 34 C.F.R. §300.301- 305 and R.C.S.A. Sec.
10-76d-9(a) and (b).

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1,
2.

The Board’s psychoeducational evaluation is appropriate.
The Parents are not entitled to an IEE at public expense.

11

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days aﬁer‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

k/Z Wx/‘ﬁ:

 

-/ . /,.t .
Hearmg Ofﬁcer Slgnature

Sylvia H0
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

