June 1, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0371

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student vs. Meriden Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro-Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103—1919

Appearing before: Robert L. Skelley, Esq;
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES: ’

1. The time period for this due process complaint is from the start of school (August, 2014)
continuing to the 2014-2015 academic period.

2. Whether the Meriden Board of Education (“Board) failed to implement the October 20, 2014
individualized education program (“IEP”) as written?

3. If the answer to Issue number 2 is “NO”, then did the Board fail to provide the Student with a
free and appropriate public education (“FAPE”) for the 2014-2015 academic years?

4. If the answer to Issue number 2 is “YES”, did the Board fail to provide the Student with a
FAPE by failing to provide a proper IEP for the 2014-2015 academic years?

5. If the Board failed to provide the Student with a FAPE for the time period in question, what
is the proper remedy for that failure to provide FAPE?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent ﬁled this request for due process which was dated February 14, 2015 but not received
until February 23, 2015. The Meriden Board of Education (“Board”) ﬁled both a Sufﬁciency
Challenge and a Motion to Dismiss on March 5, 2015. A Prehearing Conference was set for
March 6, 2015 and mailed to the Parties. Notice was provided via US. Mail, First Class, postage
prepaid as the Parent stated in her complaint that she does not have access to email on a regular
or consistent basis. The conference notice was mailed on February 28, 2015. The Prehearing
conference was opened on March 6, 2015 at 1:00 PM. The Hearing Ofﬁcer and the Board were
present; the Parent was not. The Parent subsequently informed the Parties that the notice was
not received by her until March 6, 2015, after 3:00PM, when her mail is delivered and after she
got home. She requested a longer period of notice. The prehearing conference was eventually
held on April 10, 2015 from which the issues for hearing were identiﬁed. The Board’s
Sufﬁciency motion was denied. The Board had also ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss at the same time.
The Motion to Dismiss alleged that certain portions of the hearing complaint that dealt with
information contained within the Student’s records as well as allegations of retaliation against
the Parent, were improperly before the hearing ofﬁcer. The Board’s Motion to Dismiss was

June 1, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15—0371

denied in part and allowed in part. The allegations concerning the information contained in the
records were dismissed as more properly being resolved in a FERPA hearing; the issues in the
complaint regarding retaliation were dismissed pending the facts and exhibits to be provided
through the hearing itself. As the issue of retaliation would be fact speciﬁc, then any subsequent
effect on the denial or change in services offered in an IEP, or the failure of an IEP to be
developed as a result of the retaliation, would involve the identiﬁcation, evaluation or placement
under the IDEIA and would be appropriate for this forum. The Board, though a letter to the
hearing ofﬁcer, also raised a concern about the inclusion of an issue that the Board felt was not
appropriate. The hearing ofﬁcer had included in the issues to be heard Issue Number 3 which
raised the possibility that the Board could NOT have implemented the questioned IEP as written
and STILL have provided the Student with a FAPE because the part that was not implemented
did not impact the provision of FAPE sufﬁciently to deny FAPE to the Student. The Board did
not want that possibility to be part of the hearing; their request was denied. The Parties
participated in a resolution meeting on April 27, 2015 where an agreement was reached. The
Board provided the hearing ofﬁcer with a letter, written by the Board, relating to the resolution
meeting, saying simply that an agreement had been reached, declared conﬁdential, and that the
due process hearing complaint should be dismissed with prejudice. The Board’s letter had also
been sent to the pro se Parent as well. No communication was received from the Parent since
prior to the resolution meeting. The Parent did not provide any communication with the hearing
ofﬁcer to deny that an agreement had been reached.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

Based on the assertion by the Board that an agreement had been reached between the Parties, and
given that the agreement had been declared conﬁdential by the Parties and could not be veriﬁed
by the provision of the agreement, this matter is being dismissed without prejudice for failure of
the Parent to prosecute this matter.

12/15/2811 13:26 9687743517 INNOVATIVE LEGAL PAGE' 81/81

‘ If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for '

providing Special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action On the ﬁndings or ptescription of the heating oﬁicer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof; the State Board of Education shall'takc appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or pr‘escription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to. state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of S cation 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A). . -

 

Robert L. Skelley, Esq.

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

