August 28, 2015 Final Decision and Order 15-0593

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Cromwell Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Leander A. Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Does the Student require one to one adult support throughout the school day?
2. Does the Student require an afternoon school program?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested this special education due process hearing on June 16, 2015. This
Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was assigned to the case on June 15, 2016. A preheating
conference was conducted on July 7, 2015. The Student’s parent represented the Student at
the hearing and Attorney Leander Dolphin represented the Cromwell Board of Education.
The deadline for ﬁling the ﬁnal decision was established to be August 28, 2015. Evidentiary
hearings were scheduled for September 1, 2015 and September 2, 2015.

On July 7, Counsel for the Board of Education submitted a written request for a thirty-day
postponement and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal
decision in this case to September 25, 2015. The purpose of the requested postponement and
extension was to allow the parties an opportunity to resolve the dispute. The Student agreed
to the requested postponement and it was granted.

On August 23, 2015, the Student reported that the panics had l'esolved their dispute, and
requested that the case be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education 01‘ the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬂeen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@Fa/

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signatm’e

HMJFKIKD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

