February 24, 2015 F inal Decision and Order 15—0212

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

New Britain Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Patent: Attorney Lawrence Berliner
Law Ofﬁces of Lawrence W. Berliner, LLC
1720 Post Road East, Ste. 214E
Westport, CT 06880

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Were the psychological and behavioral evaluations conducted by the Board appropriate? If not:
2. Should the Board conduct independent psychological and behavioral evaluations at public expense?
Parent issue: Was the request for due process made in a timely manner?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive FAPE as deﬁned in the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the
Parent stated that the psychological and behavioral evaluations conducted by the Board were not
appropriate and requested independent psychological and behavioral evaluations at public expense. The
Board denied the Parent’s request and on November 6, 2014, the Board ﬁled for due process. The parties
agreed to a mediate the matter.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on November 6, 2014 and a pre—hearing conference was held
on November 21, 2014. A hearing date of January 8, 2015 was chosen by the palties. On December 16,
2014, in an electronic transmission, the Board’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the parties were
able to partially resolve the matter but needed additional time to resolve the matter rather than go to a
hearing. The extension was granted. 011 F ebruary 17, 2015, in an electronic transmission, the Board’s
attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter had been resolved but needed to be ratiﬁed. The
Board’s attorney withdrew the matter without prej udice. The Parent’s attorney was in agreement with
the withdrawal. The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended to accommodate
the mediation. The date for the maﬂing the Final Decision and Order is February 25, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

  

Hearing OftRerZSignatuxe

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

