April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Newtown Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Courtney Spencer, Esq.
Law Ofﬁces of Courtney P. Spencer
100 Riverview Plaza, Suite 120
Middletown, CT 0457

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Michelle Laubin, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

\Appearing before: Sylvia H0, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:
1. Did the Board offer appropriate programs for the two years preceding the Due Process
Complaint?

2. Did the Board offer an appropriate program for the 2015-2016 school year and extended

school year?

Does Student require clinical services and residential placement?

4. Should the Board be required to reimburse Parents for the costs 0ftuiti0n and education
related expenses at Wellspring?

5. Should the Board be required to ﬁnancially suppmt the costs of clinical services and
residential placement at We11spring for the 2015-2016 school year and extended school year?

b.)

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request on May 21, 2015. The Hearing
Ofﬁcer was appointed on May 22, 2015 and conducted a Prehearing Conference on June 19,
2015 wherein the hearing issues above were identiﬁed. Hearings were conducted on the
following dates: August 20, 2015, October 9, October 15, October 27, October 28, November 5,
November 17, December 11, December 21, 2015, and Janualy 26 and February 26, 2016.

The Student executed a Power-of—Attomey to her parents so that they could represent the Student

at the Hearing. The Parents presented four witnesses. They were: Mother; Sandy Rodriguez,

Newtown Special Education Supervisor; John Franklin, Licensed Clinical Socia1 Worker, Yale-

New Haven Hospital; and David Ferguson, Licensed Clinical Social Worker, Wellspring

Foundation The Board presented seven witnesses. They were: Tom Brant, Newtown High

School School Psychologist; Julie Haggard, Newtown Public Schools Director of Pupil Services;
1

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15~0528

Deidre Croce, Newtown High School Guidance Counselor; Cate Brainard; Newtown High
School Special Education Teacher; Todd Morgan, Wheeler Clinic Special Education Teacher;
Lauren Vincens, Licensed Clinical Social Worker, Wheeler Clinic; and Sandy Rodriguez,
Newtown Special Education Supervisor.

The Board’s exhibits B-1 t0 B—147 were admitted as full exhibits. The Student’s exhibits P-l to
P-20 were admitted as ﬁll] exhibits. The Power-of—Attorney was also made a Student exhibit P-
7. The Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request was admitted as HO-1.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the parties’ requests for extension of the mailing dates of the Final
Decision as follows: On June 19, 2015, the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended
from to September 15, 2015 so that the parties could engage in mediation. On August 20, 2015,
the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended to November 20, 2015 to add hearing dates.
On November 5, 2015, the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended to January 14, 2016
to add hearing dates. On December 21, 2015, the mailing date of the Final Decision was
extended to February 29, 2016 in order to add hearing dates. On February 28, 2016, the mailing
date for the Final Decision was extended to April 29, 2016 for the parties to submit briefs.

This Final Decision and Order sets forth herein the Hearing Ofﬁcer‘s summary, ﬁndings of
facts and conclusions of law, which reference certain exhibits and witness testimony, which
are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All evidence presented was
considered in deciding this matter. To the extent the summary, procedural history and ﬁndings
of facts actually represent conclusions of law, they should so be considered and Vice versa.
See SAS Institute Inc. v. S & H Computer Systems, Inc., 605 F. Supp. 816 (M.D. Tenn. 1985)
and Bonnie Arm F. Callallen Independent School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD, Tex. 1993).
A11 motions that were not previously ruled upon are hereby denied.

SUMMARY:

The issues in this Due Process hearing involve whether the Board failed to provide a free and
appropriate public education in the two years prior to the ﬁling of the Due Process Complaint for
a 19 year old high school student who was identiﬁed under the category of Serious Emotional
Disturbance. Student was enrolled at Newtown High School in March of 2014. She was placed
by the Newtown School District at the Wheeler Clinic, a state approved special education school
in J anuary of 2015. At the time of the hearing, Student was enrolled at the Arch Bridge School;
a state approved special education school at Board expense and parentally placed in a residential
treatment program at Wellspring Foundation. Parents believe that the Board failed to provide
Student with a free and appropriate education from the time that Student was enrolled in the
school district. Further, Parents believe that the Student required clinical services and residential
treatment in order to access her education.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §10-
76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations, and in
accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4—176e to 4—
178, inclusive, §§4—181a and 4—186.

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence and
testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following relevant facts:

1.

At the beginning of the hearing Student was nineteen (19) years old and attending a
residential treatment program at Wellspring Foundation and receiving her education at
Archbridge School. At the last hearing date, the Parents reported that the Student had
been discharged from Wellspring and was completing a high school class online. She
was taking courses at community college and it was anticipated that she would graduate
from high school in J une 2016. (Testimony, Mother)

Student is a resident of Newtown. She attended Newtown Public Schools until the end of
seventh grade She attended Faith Academy, a private Christian school, for eighth to
tenth grades. Though Student attended Faith Academy, she maintained friendships with
other children in Newtown and continued to reside in Newtown. The Student was
academically successful at Faith Academy in the 8th and 91h grades. In the 9th grade, she
developed anxiety after negative peer interactions at school. In the fall of 2012, when
Student was in the 10‘11 grade, Student began to experience episodes ofpanie attacks and
bouts of crying, which had progressed to suicidal thoughts and cutting. (B-36)

The Parents worried and sought immediate medical help. Her therapist and Margaret
Connaghan, APRN referred her for inpatient treatment at an inpatient psychiatric
treatment center. Student was a patient at Silver Hills Hospital from November 12, 2012
to November 16, 2012. While at Silver Hills, Student was rated as high risk in the area of
suicidal ideation with constant suicidal thoughts; having a lethal plan with moderate risk
of carrying out the suicide plan. (Testimony, Mother; B-36)

Student’s biithday is 12/14/1996. Her birthday in the tenth grade was marked by the
hon‘iﬁc tragedy now commonly known as the “Newtown School Shooting”. On that day,
gunman Adam Lanza, a former student, went to Student’s former elementaly school and
committed mass murder killing school staff and children. The shooting placed additional
stressors on Student’s mind but had not developed to the point of post-traumatic stress
disorder. However, it was a recurrent shadow in her depression. (Testimony, Ferguson)
By spring of 2013, Student who already suffering major depression and anxiety and was
refusing to go to school and asking to come home during the school day. Absences
increased and by the end of the school year, Student was absent from Faith Academy 30
times. Despite her absences, however, Student was able to earn enough educational credit
for the 10‘h grade. (Testimony, Mother; B-40)

The Parents sought psychiatric treatment for Student. Because of Student’s school
refusal, Parents attempted to homeschool Student. However, by mid-November of 2013,
it became clear to the Mother that Student was not progressing in homeschooling.
(Testimony, Mother)

The Mother testiﬁed that her daughter had not been receiving any education at home
because she had given up on homeschooling and that she was “desperate” to get help for
her daughter at this time. The Mother went to the Newtown Schools’ Central Ofﬁce
intending on requesting educational services for her daughter. The Mother thought she
was doing everything she had to do to procure educational services from Newtown
Schools. The record is devoid of any evidence that school district staff explained the

3

 

April 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 15-0528

10.

ll.

process of enrollment of a student with a disability in need of special education to the
Mother. The Mother was told by Board staff that she had to bring supporting
documentation for a referral for special education. (Testimony, Mother)

Thereafter, the Mother called all of the Student’s mental health providers and obtained
letters for the school district. She wrote a detailed letter explaining the Student’s mental
health history; compiled the Student’s Faith Academy repult cards and treating provider
letters. (Testimony, Mother; B-44, B-44a) This package was delivered to the Newtown
Schools Central Ofﬁce on December 4, 2013. (B-45, Testimony, Mother).

The Mother’s letter was comprehensive and provided a poitrait of Student. The Mother
stated that she had attempted to homeschool Student since the fall of 2013 but had not
been successful. She provided a detailed history of the Student’s mental health treatment,
including hospitalization in November 2012 at Silver Hills Hospital; an Intensive
Outpatient Program at Yale, Which had been completed on November 11, 2013 and a
description of the mental health providers and their treatment of Student. As of
December 3, 2013, the Student was hospitalized a second time at Yale-New Haven
Hospital. Two of the letters provided by the Mother to the Board, including the letter
from Yale-New Haven Hospital were not included in the Board’s exhibits. (B-44, B—44a,
B-40, B-41, B-42, B-29-B—35, B—37-B-39).

Richard Baird, LCSW, a Licensed Clinical Social Worker, provided information that
Student could appear non—anxious when she really was. In his letter, he stated that
“[Student] demonstrated a sense of humor and a full range affect which did not match her
stated moods that [Student] reported as a front to avoid showing her depression.” (B-42)

Rebecca Ambrose, LMFT, a Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist, stated that she had
been consistently treating Student since May 2013 and that she was currently treating
Student on a weekly basis. She shed light that the source of Student’s anxiety in the
school setting. She stated that

“[w]hen discussing challenges in the school environment, [Student]
experienced frequent panic attacks, set off by academic performance
issues and social interaction situations. . .. When discussing possible
solutions, [Student] states that she is very motivated to re—engage in an
academic environment that is emotionally supportive of her mental health
needs. She has discussed with me that a therapy school is of great interest
because she can work through the emotional difﬁculties With trained staff,
while gaining the academic and social learning appropriate for her age. I
agree this would be a more productive and healthy option for [Student].”
(B-42)
Margaret E. Connaghan, MSN, APRN, a psychiatric nurse practitioner, stated that the
Student’s current treatment plan included medication intervention and individual
counseling and questioned whether Student would require a therapeutic placement. She
stated as follows:

“[Student’s] snuggle academically appears in large part due to anxiety. The
family is requesting your help and guidance in determining the best approach to
[Student’s] education. It is unclear about her ability to attend Newtown High
School and she may require placement in an alternative environment.” (B-43)

4

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

12. A Planning and Placement Team meeting (“PPT”) convened on December 20, 2013. In
attendance were: Robin Lawler—Pavia, Administrator; Parents; Lee Keylock, Regular
Education Teacher; Anne Catlin, Special Education Teacher; Tom Brant, School
Psychologist; Deidre Croce, Guidance Counselor; Sherry Earle, PhD and Dimitri
Thorton, Psychologist—Intern. By this time, Student had been released from Yale-New
Haven Hospital and was at the Derby Intensive Outpatient Program. (B-46; Testimony,
Mother)

13. At the time of this PPT, Newtown Schools had the following information about Student’s
presentation and behavior which impeded learning: 1) That the Student anxiety increased
to a degree in the tenth grade that she began avoiding going to school or wanted to go
home when she was in school; 2) That the behavior resulting in the disability was refusal
to go to school or avoidance of staying in school; 3) That anxiety stemmed originally
from interactions with school peers and academic perfonnance issues; 4) That the Student
hid this anxiety with an affect that made it appear as though she was not anxious; 5) That
the Student’s anxiety and depression was so severe that it require repeated extensive
mental health treatment and two hospitalizations. (B-44, B-44a, B-40, B—41, B~42, B-29-
B-35, B-37-B-39).

14. The PPT agreed to conduct an initial evaluation. This would include a psychoeducational
evaluation, which included academic achievement and intelligence testing; rating scales;
projective measures; clinical interview. A social and developmental history would also be
taken. The Parents signed releases for the school to obtain school records from Faith
Academy and to contact the Derby IOP. (B-46)

15. MI. Brant testiﬁed that there was a need for evaluative data about Student. On cross-
examination, he acknowledged that a diagnostic placement in the school setting could
have been an option to collect data on Student’s behavior and functioning but he had not
considered it. (B—46, B—47, B-48, B-49).

16. Dimitri Thorton, MA, conducted a Psychosocial and Development History Report. He
reported information based upon a ﬁle review and questionnaire to Parents. His report
did not include the information provided by Richard Laird, LCSW that the Student’s
affect did not match her mood. Newtown High School Psychologist administered
assessments to Student. These assessments were performed at the school district Central
Ofﬁce because Student was too anxious to enter the Newtown High School building. (B—
52, Testimony, Brant)

17. The PPT convened on February 21, 2014 at the school district Central Ofﬁce. The
purpose of the PPT was to determine eligibility and develop an Individualized Education
Program (“IEP”) for Student. (B- 54). Prior to the meeting, the Parent had been trying to
have the PPT scheduled to an alternative location from the high school. The Student did
not want to come to the high school building because of her anxiety. On February 5,
2014, the Mother emailed Torn Brant, the School Psychologist. She stated, “ Just wanted
to follow up with you. When we saw you last week you said you were going to try to get
the mtg moved out of the high school, I was wondering if you had any luck? [Student]
really needs to attend and I know it will be very difﬁcult if not impossible, to get her to
the High School for the mtg. Thanks for everything.” (P-S).

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

In attendance were: Julie Haggard, Administrator; Father; Mother; Student; Karin
Sherman, Regular Education Teacher; Anne Catlin, Special Education Teacher; Tom
Brant, School Psychologist; Ana Mendes, Guidance Counselor; Dimitri Thornton, School
Psychologist Intern; Sherry Earle, PhD. (B-54; Testimony, Mother; Testimony, Haggard)

The PPT reviewed the checklist for eligibility under the State of Connecticut “Guidelines
for Identifying and Educating Students with Emotional Disturbance” and found Student
eligible to receive Special Education and Related Services under the category of
Emotional Disturbance. (B-54)

The program proposed included four hours of homebound tutoring weekly which was to
result in 1.0 credit in junior English and 1.0 credit in elective art as an independent study
with an alt teacher; 90 minutes of counseling; and 30 minutes of transition per week.
Counseling goals included improving skills of self—awareness and seIf—concept generally
to identify anxiety-provoking situations. The PPT meeting summary stated “A
counseling goal for social/emotional that aligns with outside support will be drafted to
include areas such as self—worth, self—esteem, self—advocacy, self—efﬁcacy, time
management, focus and behavior regulation.” (Testimony, Brant). (B-54)

The Student was upset about the program being offered. She did not want to come to
Newtown High School. She felt she needed to be in a therapeutic day school.
(Testimony, Mother; Testimony, Brant). The Mother expressed uncertainty about
whether the Student’s psychiatrist, Dr. Lustick, would approve of a plan to have Student
come to the school. She asked if Dr. Lustick had yet been contacted. She was asked to
sign a release to speak with Dr. Lustick. (Testimony, Mother; Testimony, Brant)

The Mother left the PPT with the Student because they were in a rush to get to the IOP
and Student was upset. She took the papers with her. (Testimony, Mother; Testimony,
Brant)

J ulie Haggard, Special Education Director, testiﬁed that the Mother took the papers with
her to decide whether the she was going to enroll her in Newtown schools. The PPT
summary states “Parent did not sign consent for placement into special education and
took the document home with her to sign if she decides to enroll her daughter in the
Newtown Public Schools.” (B-54, Testimony, Haggard) However, the Mother believed
that she was doing everything necessary to enroll Student in school. The Mother was
unceitain about the progi'am. (Testimony, Mother).

Ms. Haggard testiﬁed about her extensive responsibility for the school district’s services
in the Wake of the Newtown shooting. She testiﬁed that it is a fairly large district. Her
many responsibilities include being the lead administrator for the Newtown Recovery
Program for mental health supports for trauma to the district’s students in the wake of the
shooting. She attended only one PPT meeting concerning Student. The administrator who
was responsible for the Student’s case was Robin Lawler-Pavia who has since retired.
Her knowledge about the case was based upon her memory of what Ms. Lawler—Pavia
told her. She testiﬁed that Robin Lawler-Pavia gave the parents information about
enrollment but stated on cross-examination that she was on the phone in her ofﬁce when
this happened. She just saw the parents walk by. (Testimony, Haggard)

During her testimony, Ms. Haggard confused Student with another student. Much of her
testimony did not match the information in Board exhibits. Though she was emphatic

6

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

26.

27.

28.

about her memory and knowledge about the case, her testimony was contradicted by
other sources. For instance, Ms. Haggard blamed the Student’s anxiety, school fears and
lack of progress on the parents. She testiﬁed that the Parents frequently switched mental
health providers. The medical records did not support this. It was true that Students saw
different providers as a result of hospitalization and intensive therapy; but she had
consistently received treatment from a therapist and APRN. She testiﬁed that had the
Parents kept the Student in school, the Student would not have had a phobia about school.
However, this was contradicted by Student mental health provider letters that
characterized Student’s anxiety as school-related dating back to her attendance at Faith
Academy. (B-Bl, B- 42, B-43, B-44a).

The Rebecca Ambrose LMF T and Margaret Connaghan APRN provider letters suggested
exploration of a therapeutic day placement option. Ms. Haggard testiﬁed that a
therapeutic placement was discussed at the PPT. The PPT minutes do not reﬂect such a
conversation and the IEP does not list therapeutic placement as an option that was
considered. The Mother denies this was discussed. Ms. Haggard testiﬁed that the Parents
told the PPT that Student’s psychiatrist, Dr. Lustick, did not agree that a therapeutic
placement was necessary and the issue was dropped. The Mother denies that this ever
happened. Therapeutic day placement is an alternative placement under the IDEA. If it
was discussed by the PPT, it should have been included in the PPT minutes or listed as an
option that was considered. (Testimony, Haggard; Testimony, Mother; B- 54).

At the time of the hearing, Student was in a residential treatment facility. One of the
issues in this hearing is whether Student required a residential placement. Ms. Haggard
testiﬁed that the Student was placed in residential treatment because there was conﬂict in
the home and the Student needed to get away from her parents. This is contradicted by
the Board’s own Social and Developmental History, which reveals that there was a close
family relationship. Student has a very close relationship with Mother. Student has
always relied on her mother for support. (B-53). The Mother took the witness chair to
rebut this testimony. She appeared very upset by Ms. Haggard’s suggestion. Further, the
Board’s educational record also contains details of the fact that Student’s mental illness
was school related. Student ﬁrst experienced anxiety and depression relating to peer
interactions at school. The Board’s interviewer reported that “[t]he effects of the anxiety
and depression also resulted in somatic symptoms culminating into nearly daily calls to
[Mother] to leave school. [Mother] would have some success with getting [Student] to
school, often having to sit in the ofﬁce with [Student] coming back to the ofﬁce to check
in with her mother” (B-53) Indeed, the manner in which Ms. Haggard made her remarks
appeared to be insensitive and cavalier considering the painful subject of the Student’s
mental illness.

Finally, Ms. Haggard testiﬁed that the PPT reviewed the input of all medical providers
and that they were in agreement with the IEP. She testiﬁed that Tom Brant, the School
Psychologist had had the input of Student’s treating providers and that this information
was used in creating the February 20, 2014 IEP for Student. This testimony was
contradicted by the testimony of Tom Brant himself. In fact, Mr. Brant testiﬁed that he,
in fact, had not contacted any medical providers prior to the February 2014 PPT.
(Testimony, Brant). Ms. Haggard’s testimony has been contradicted by so many sources
that the Hearing Ofﬁcer cannot credit her testimony.

7

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Mr. Brant’s testimony was also problematic. His testimony is contrary to the record. Mr.
Brant’s testiﬁed that he did not contact any of Student’s medical providers to get input
into the development of the February 20, 2014 IEP because it had not appeared from
medical provider letters that these medical providers were then currently providing
treatment to Student. The medical provider letters and health records provided to the
PPT contradict this. For instance, Rebecca Ambrose, LMFT and Margaret Conneghan,
APRN both stated in their letters that they were currently treating Student. Further, the
hospital records revealed Margaret Conneghan, APRN was the referral source for
hospitalizations. Mr. Brant either did not read the letters carefully or at all during the
PPT planning process, or did not accurately testify about the real reason why he did not
contact Student’s providers for input or further information. (Testimony, Brant; B-40; B-
41).

Ms. Haggard testiﬁed that the PPT provided a few hours of home tutoring at Parent
request because the Parents did not want to overwhelm Student. Ms. Haggard testiﬁed
that the Student was receiving treatment in an IOP and was not available for courses.
The Mother denied this and testiﬁed- that the IOP was for a limited amount of time and
the Student was able to take courses. Mr. Brant, contrary to Ms. Haggard and consistent
with the Mother, testiﬁed that the PPT agreed to provide home tutoring in order to ease
the Student back into school. (B-40, B-41, B-42, B-44).

From February 25, 2014 to March 11, 2014, the Mother emailed Mr. Brant to see if he
had spoken to Dr. Lustick. MI. Brant emailed that they were “playing phone tag”. On
March 14, 2014, Mr. Brant emailed Mother to let her know he had spoken to Dr. Lustick.
He wrote, “I tried to explain [the IEP] to him regarding the number of hours of
education/counseling/and transition sewices [Student] will be receiving.” The February
IEP minutes stated that the PPT agreed that “[a] counseling goal for social/emotional that
aligns with outside support will be drafted to include areas such as self-worth, self—
esteem, self-advocacy, self—efﬁcacy, time management, focus and behavior regulation.”
It appears that Mr. Brant did not ask for Dr. Lustick’s input. The goal was not added to
the IEP. On March 17, 2014, the Mother wrote back to Mr. Brant, “I will see Dr Lustick
today at 830. I don’t anticipate he will go with the new options so I want to sign the IEP
today as I am nearing a deadline. I still cannot ﬁnd a date. I also need to register
[Student]. Who can I meet with to sign papers. . .I am available today. Thanks.” Later
that morning, Mr. Brant wrote back, “I asked someone to get in touch with you regarding
the IEP. As I understand you do not have a deadline to send the form back by. However,
we cannot start sewices until we have the form signed.” (B-129).

Student received a total of 10 hours of tutoring from Excel Tutoring, a board contractor
for English literature from April 5, 2014 to the end of the school year in 2014. (B—llS).
The Mother testiﬁed that the tutoring sessions were held at a Dunkin Donuts shop.
(Testimony, Mother). Student received her alt tutoring in a one-on—one setting away from
other students. (B—6l). Mr. Brant testiﬁed that he had expected that Student would
receive a half a credit each in English and the Art class. The Student did receive a half a
credit in Art but only .25 credit for English. (Testimony, Brant; B-62; B-l 14).

The PPT convened on May 29, 2014 to review the Student’s IEP. In attendance were:
Robin Lawler-Pavia, Administrator; Father; Mother; Student; Carol Skolas, Regular
Education Teacher/Art Teacher; Anne Catlin, Special Education Teacher; Lauren

8

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

34.

35.

36.

37.

Beeson, Social Worker; Tom Brant, School Psychologist; Ana Mendes, Guidance
Counselor and Katherine Matz-Special Education staff. The PPT reviewed progress. The
Social Worker reported that she had been meeting with Student and that sometimes the
meeting was held at the Central Ofﬁce and sometimes at the high School and that even
though progress was being made, the Student was having difﬁculty coming into the high
school. The Art Teacher reported that Student worked well in a one-on—one setting and
stated that the Student had encountered the art classroom after school ﬁlled with students
and became uncomfortable. She was taken out of the classroom to the Art Teacher’s
ofﬁce to relieve her anxiety. The Student was unwilling to sit in a classroom with a staff
member. The PPT discussed Extended School Year Services for Senior English through
the department of Continuing Education and reduced counseling to 45 minutes per week.
The minutes reﬂect that the Student was on target to receive the half credits for English
literature and Art during the spring semester. The Student eventually received only half
of the credit planned for English and half a credit for Art. (B-61; B-145)

The PPT proposed seivices and classes for the next school year, which would be a full
schedule to be held in Newtown High School. The IEP included resource room for
critical skills academic support class and reduced counseling to 45 minutes once a week.
Behavioral interventions included the following: “Encourage self-advocacy, Positive
Reinforcement, Support in organizing materials.” Despite the reports of the Student’s
difﬁculty entering the high school building and being with other students, there were no
behavioral interventions to support anxiety in school or preplanning in the event that
Student would become anxious and want to leave class or school. The PPT summary
inexplicably declares, “She is not anxious about attending school in the fall because it is a
fresh beginning for everyone.” Mr. Brant did not recall that these were the Student’s own
words. (B-61; Testimony, Brant)

The Student continued to experience anxiety and inability to enter the school building.
On June 4, 2014, the Mother wrote an email to Mr. Brant. She stated, “I was hoping to
get her there but she has been having such anxiety it is making her sick. . . .I think if you
are able the only way it will work is if you come down to mrs croce’s ofﬁce and ask her
if she could meet with you for a short time. I am not sure I will get her there tomorrow
but I have been stressing the importance especially bee she has a question on one of her
classes.” (P-5; Testimony, Mother)

The Student took two English courses at the high school in classes with other students.
She attended a total of 10 days of school beginning on July 7, 2014 for a total of 8 hours.
In the middle of this period, Student experienced an increase of symptoms due to anxiety.
On July 21, 2014, Student was hospitalized a third time. She returned and completed 6
more days of school. She received a half credit each for Senior English I and Senior
English II. (B-116) Student received a total of 1.75 credits toward graduation from
March 20, 2014 to the end of Extended School Year. (B-l45)

The 2014-2015 school year began on August 26, 2014. (B-122) On the ﬁfth day of
school, Student began to ask her mother to come home from school. Her mother refused
to pick her up from school. This was to be the general strategy and advice from the
school to the Mother. A few weeks later, Student was not completing her work. She
spent her free periods in the school courtyard, which was a private area of the school.
Catherine Brainard was Student’s Special Education Teacher. She was assigned to be

9

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

Student’s case manager at the beginning of the school year and had not previously met
Student. She read the Student’s ﬁle in order to get acquainted with Student. She met the
Student on the ﬁrst day of school. (P-S; Testimony, Brainard)

Ms. Brainard testiﬁed that the Student would ask to leave the classroom and sometimes
went to the courtyard. Because the Student’s affect and demeanor did not show her
anxiety, Ms. Brainard could not tell that Student was anxious 01‘ panicky. She testiﬁed
that she had had a lot of students with emotional disturbances and thought she could
assess anxious behavior. However, Student gave no sign of emotionality and seemed
very personable. She did not believe the Student needed help with anxiety. She thought
the Student was leaving to meet a boy when in fact she left to get away and to call her
Mother to be picked up. (Testimony, Brainard; Testimony, Mother)

On September 16, 2014 (a month after the beginning of school), Deidre Croce, Guidance
Counselor, wrote to Mr. Brant, Ms. Brainard and Katherine Matz, another Special
Education staff7 “We need to stay closely aligned on communicating about [Student].
The honeymoon period is over and as Tom said in his prior email, she is starting to show
signs ofincreasing anxiety and is lookingfor ways out ofclasses and school in general. I
saw her during her lunch period and she is adamant about going home. I talked to her,
called Mom and did a lot of back and faith and was able to convince her to stay until
1:00, but it was a struggle. I think this is going to keep escalating so we need tofocus
keeping her in school as long as possible every day.” (P-S). Ms. Croce testiﬁed that it
was the school’s practice to keep students going to school. Sometimes students would
eventually overcome their anxiety. Sometimes it worked and sometimes it did not.
(Testimony, Croce)

While the Student was experiencing anxiety, she attempted to see the school nurse or
hide in the bathroom, for which she received conduct refen‘alS. Student was disciplined
and had to sewe detention for conduct arising from her disability. Mr. Brant testiﬁed that
he had not been aware that the Student received conduct referrals for truancy. He
testiﬁed that the school’s disciplinaiy staff was not informed that Student was a student
with the disability of emotional disturbance. (Testimony, Mother; Testimony, Brant;
Testimony, Brainard; B-65).

During these anxious periods, Student would sometimes seek out Ms. Croce for suppoﬁ.
Ms. Croce testiﬁed that Newtown Public Schools did not have staff to provide clinical
suppott services for students. School Psychologists, Social Workers and Counselors all
provided school based supports, which meant that the school staff would talk with
students about strategies to access school only. (P—S) (Testimony, Croce)

Student continued to struggle with anxiety and attendance in classes at Newtown High
School throughout September into the fall of 2014. She did not go to class or complete
work. Mr. Brant, Mrs. Brainard and Mrs. Croce decided among themselves on a plan,
which consisted of insisting that the Student stay in the room until the entire class was
over. Student continued to miss class and did not engage in schoolwork. (P-S)

On October 16, Ms. Croce sent an email to the Mother stating, “we just had our meeting
with the teachers regarding [Student’s] progress. .. the Teachers had indicated concern in
her level academic engagement.” (P-S). At the same time, staff agreed to put the Student
on “pass restriction”. Mr. Brant testiﬁed that this meant that Student would not lose

10

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

academic credit or receive discipline for needing to leave class to see the nurse or a
counselor for her anxiety when it arose. (P—S). It is difﬁcult for this Hearing Ofﬁcer to
understand why such an accommodation would not have already been included in the
Student’s May 29, 2014 113?. At that time, the PPT increased the Student’s educational
hours to a full time schedule in a school building in which Student was experiencing
heightened anxiety. That Student had previously experienced school anxiety was
information that the PPT had as early as December of 2013. The events that unfolded
could have easily been anticipated with the information that was already available.
There was no planning to avoid this situation and the Student did not access the
curriculum or receive beneﬁt from school.

Student continued to struggle with attendance and classwork throughout the fall of 2014.
On October 27, 2014, Student was again admitted to Yale-New Haven Hospital for
treatment for suicidal ideation. (B-75) On October 28, 2014, Mr. Brant emailed the staff
that the Student had been approved to receive an “incomplete” for the ﬁrst quatter of the
semester. Student returned to school but was continuing to struggle with anxiety with
school. (P-S).

A PPT convened on November 14, 2014. In attendance were: Sandy Rodriguez,
Administrator; Mother; Father; Candi Dietter, Regular Education Teacher; Cate Brainard,
Special Education Teacher; Tom Brant, School Psychologist; Suzanne Tyler, Social
Worker; Deidre Croce, Guidance Counselor; David Roach, Assistant Principal; Rosann
Morcell, the Student’s outside therapist; and Katherine Matz, Special Education Teacher.
The PPT reviewed the Student’s performance. She had between 15-21 absences in each
class. The Student’s therapist talked about the Student’s recent hospitalization and stated
that clinicians had not determined speciﬁc diagnoses. The PPT proposed to place Student
in a therapeutic day school. A review of the November 14, 2014 IEP reveals that IEP
goals that were repeated from Student’s February 21, 2014 IEP without mastery or with
limited progress. The PPT summary reported that Ms. Brainard had stated that the
Student had mastered transition goals but this information did not match pages 3 and 4 of
the IEP, which showed limited progress. Nevertheless, the PPT minutes note that Student
was on schedule to graduate at the end of the school year if she ﬁnished her classes. (B—
73)

The Student eventually enrolled in Wheeler Academy at the Wheeler Clinic
(“Wheeler”), a state approved therapeutic day school beginning J anuary 13, 2015. She
had earned only 1.75 credits toward graduation at Newtown High School from March
2014 to January 12, 2015. (B-145)

Student consistently attended Wheeler for 17 school days when Wheeler was in session.
Because of snow days or holidays, the Academy was in session three to four days per
week during the ﬁrst ﬁve weeks of Student attendance. (B-119) Initially, Student was
enthusiastic about being able to attend a therapeutic day school. The Wheeler check
sheet data summary revealed that Student initially followed directions; had good days and
made “excellent” effort. But by the second week, her behaviors began to devolve. The
Mother testiﬁed that after the second week, it was a struggle in the mornings to get the
Student to go to Wheeler. (Testimony, Mother)

A PPT convened on F ebruary 12, 2014, which served as Student’s Annual Review. The
PPT agreed that Student would need a ﬁfth year in order to graduate from high school.

11

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

Student had not earned enough credits toward graduation. (Testimony, Rodriguez;
Testimony, Mother; B-99)

Lauren Vincens is a Licensed Clinical Social Worker. She was Student’s clinician at
Wheeler. She testiﬁed that she encouraged the Student to seek her out if she was overly
stressed at school. She testiﬁed that Student experienced increased stress immediately
before and after the February 12, 2014 PPT because she had anxiety about not being able
to graduate with her same age peers. Student also became very depressed and discussed
the Newtown School shooting. In fact, Student had been cutting herself since she had

‘been enrolled at Wheeler. (Testimony, Vincens; Testimony, Ferguson; Testimony,

Mother)

A few days after the February 12 Annual Review PPT, Student became despondent and
suicidal again. She was admitted to Yale-New Haven Hospital on February 18, 2015. (P-
13). John Franklin, a Licensed Clinical Social Worker with extensive experience, is
employed by the psychiatric observational unit at Yale. He interviewed the Student,
reviewed her records and spoke with her private therapist. The Student had told Mr.
Franklin that she had been upset that her peers would be graduating in June and going on
to college. She would not be able to graduate and move on. These stressors led to her
overwhelming emotions. Student also discussed with Mr. Franklin the fact that the
Newtown shooting anniversary fell on her biithday. Mr. Franklin testiﬁed that his review
of the Student’s mental health history revealed that hospitalizations were becoming more
frequent and had not worked. The Student’s mental illness was severe enough to warrant
residential treatment. He believed that without residential treatment, the Student would
get worse. He thought that the Student might be suffering from Borderline Personality
Disorder, which is very difﬁcult to treat. He recommended that Parents contact
Wellspring, a residential treatment facility, because it has been successful in treating
difﬁcult cases such as Borderline Personality Disorder. Dr. Lustick believed the Student
had made limited gains with outpatient care and thought that the counseling services at
Wheeler were ineffective. He supported Mr. Franklin’s recommendation to Wellspring.
(Testimony, Franklin; Testimony, Mother; P-12.

After overnight observation, Student was discharged but was readmitted again the
following night on February 20, 2014 for a week. (B-102; Testimony, Mother). The
family contacted Wellspring and was told that there was nothing available for Student for
another few weeks. (Testimony, Mother)

David Ferguson is a Licensed Clinical Social Worker and the Clinical Director of
Angelus House at Wellspring. He also holds a Masters in Education. Angelus House is
the residential house for female patients over 18 years of age. Mr. Ferguson has had
extensive experience in psychiatric settings with patients. Angelus House is a secured
facility with staff available to ensure patients’ safety. It is staffed by a psychiatrist and
licensed staff. All of the patients at Angelus House have engaged in self—harm or suicidal
ideations. Some have attempted suicide. Angelus House turns away many people
because it takes the most difﬁcult cases. Student was accepted because her illness was
difﬁcult to treat. (P—14; Testimony, Ferguson)

Student was admitted to Angelus House in March of 2015. While at Angelus House,
Student did not receive any educational services until April of 2015. Mr. Ferguson
testiﬁed that initially Student was being evaluated to determine whether she was able to

12

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

54.

55.

56.

be safe enough to go to school. On April 22, 2015, the Student was placed at Arch
Bridge School, which was part of Wellspring Foundation and serviced students under 18
years of age. Sandy Rodriguez, Newtown Special Education Supervisor, testiﬁed that
she believed that the placement at Wheeler was appropriate. She stated that the Board
agreed to pay for tuition and transportation from Angelus House to Arch Bridge School
in order to be collaborative with Parents. (Testimony, Ferguson; Testimony, Rodriguez;
B-109)

Mr. Ferguson testiﬁed that the Wheeler placement did not work because it lacked
sufﬁcient clinical supports. If Wheeler’s clinical supports worked, the Student would not
have had to continue to be hospitalized and would not have difﬁculty with absences and
readmission to receiving education. (Testimony, Ferguson)

Mr. Ferguson testiﬁed that his goal at Angelus House was to treat Student so that she
could become stable enough to go to school. Angelus House offered an array of clinical
and therapeutic services including counseling and art therapy. The Student had intensive
daily counseling support. On occasion in the past, Angelus House has had to send
patients to the hospital in emergency situations. However, it is rare because of the level
of therapeutic support available. While at Angelus House, Student did not experience
hospitalization. She was able to go to school at Arch Bridge voluntarily and had a perfect
attendance record. This attendance and educational beneﬁt is a stark contrast to her 11‘“
grade year and ESY in Newtown High School and month at Wheeler. Her grades as of
November 4, 2015 were English - 94; Pre-Calculus -85; Civics -97; Chemistry— 93; Art—
95; Vocational Exploration -P. Teachers’ comments included “outstanding” and
“improved progress”; “good class participation”; “completes work”; “shows interest and
effort”; “displays appropriate behavior”; “working to ability with support”;
“demonstrates strong work ethic.” (P—18; B—l20; B—123)

This incredible turnaround can only be attributed to the residential placement. Because
of the inappropriate programs offered by the Board at Newtown High School and
Wheeler, the staff focused on trying to get Student to go to and stay in the school
building. There was an amazing turnaround as a result of residential treatment and the
skilled work of David Ferguson and staff. After the residential placement in Angelus
House, the Student shifted from school refusal to being a diligent student who accessed
education and did well at school. Whereas the Board’s failure to properly program
resulted in the loss of almost a year of school, Angelus House’s intensive clinical sewices
allowed Student to receive meaningful beneﬁt from the curriculum. Thanks only to the
residential treatment program, Student is able to graduate and attend courses in
community college in anticipation of her plans to enroll in a four-year college.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1. There is no dispute that Student is eligible to receive a free and appropriate public education
(FAPE) and related services as set forth in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA), 20 USC Sec 1401, et seq. and its implementing regulations codiﬁed at 34 CFR
§300 et. Seq., and under Conn. Gen. Stat. Sec. 10-76.

2. The purpose of the IDEA is to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them
FAPE that emphasizes “special education and related services designed to meet their unique

13

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

needs” and “prepare them for further education, employment and independent living” and “to
ensure that the rights of children with disabilities and parents of such children are
protected. ..” 20 U.S.C. §1400(d)(l).

3. The Act deﬁnes FAPE as special education and related services which “(A) have been
provided at public expense, under public supervision and direction, and without charge; (B)
meet the standards of the State Educational Agency; (C) include an appropriate preschool,
elementary, 01‘ secondary school education in the State involved; and (D) are provided in
conformity with the individualized education program required under Sec. 614(d).” 20
U.S.C. §1401 (8).

4. The Board has the burden of proving the appropriateness of the Student's program and
placement, which burden shall be met by a preponderance of the evidence. Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies (R.C.S.A.) Sec 10-76h—l4.

5. The standard for determining whether a Board has provided a free appropriate public
education is set forth as a two-part inquiry in Board afEducatian offhe Hendrick Hudson
Central School District v Rowley, 458 U S 176( 1982). The ﬁrst question to be determined is
whether the Board complied with the procedural requirements of the Act? The second
question to be determined is whether the Individualized Education Program is “reasonably
calculated to enable the child to receive educational benefits?” Rowley, 458 U S at 206-207.

6. Addressing the ﬁrst prong 0f the Rowley inquiry, the initial procedural inquiiy is not a
formality. As the Supreme Court noted in Rowley, Congress’s emphasis in the IDEA “upon
the full paiticipation of concerned parties throughout the development of the IEP,” together
with the requirement for federal approval of state and local plans, reﬂects a “conviction that
adequate compliance with the procedures prescribed would in most cases assure much if not
all of what Congress wished in the way of a substantive content in an lEP.” 458 US at 206."
Walczak v Florida Union Free School District, 27 IDELR 1135 (2d Cir 1998). The
procedural guidelines of the IDEA are designed to guarantee that the education of each child
with disabilities are tailored to meet the child’s unique needs and abilities. 20 U.S.C. § 1412
and 1415. These procedural guarantees are procedural safeguards against arbitrary and
erroneous deeision—making. Daniel RR. v State Board ofEducaz‘ion, 874 F.2d 1036, 1041
(5"‘ Cir. 1989). Compliance with the lDEA’s procedural requirements is the responsibility of
the board and not the parents. UniﬁedSch. Dist. V. Dept. ofEci, 64 Conn. App. 273. 285
(2001). However, a procedural violation of the IDEA does not, in and of itself, warrant a
change in the child’s educational placement. In order to conclude that procedural violations
resulted in a denial of a free appropriate public education, the parent must show that the
procedural errors resulted in a loss of educational opportunity. See Burke County Bd. 0f
Educ. v. Denton, 895 F.2d 973, 982 (4‘h Cir. l999); Evans vi District N0, 17, 841 F.2d 824,
830 (81h Cir. 1988). Procedural ﬂaws do not automatically require the Hearing Ofﬁcer to ﬁnd
that a denial of FAPE has occurred, instead, the hearing ofﬁcer must determine if the
procedural inadequacies resulted in the “loss of educational opportunities or seriously
infringed upon the parent’s oppoxtunity to participate in formulating the [IEP]...” Procedural
violations that interfere with parental participation in the IEP formulation process undeimine
the very essence of the IDEA. Amanda J. ex rel Annette J. v. Clark County Sch. Dist. 267
F .3d 877 (9‘h Cir. 2001). An lEP addresses the unique needs of the child and cannot be
developed if those people most familiar with the child’s needs are not involved or fully
informed. IDEA expects strong participation at PPT meetings. Warren G. v. Cumberland

14

 

April 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 15—0528

County Sch. Dist. 190 F.3d. 80 (3d Cir. 1993). The IEP is to be a collaborative process
developed by the parents of the student, educators and other specialists. Hoenig v. Doe 484
US 305, 311 (1988).

7. Connecticut Guidelines for the Identiﬁcation and Education for Students with Emotional
Disturbance sets forth best practices and restates school district obligations under the IDEA
and Connecticut law. With regard to assessing behavioral needs of students with emotional
disturbance, the guidelines state the following: “PPTs are charged with developing IEPs for
students who meet eligibility requirements for special education. To meet the requirements of
the IDEA, when necessary, the IEP must address students' unique behavioral needs as well as
their leaming issues. Teams must explore the heedfor interventions and supports to address
any student’s behavior that impedes the learning of the student with a disability as well as the
impact of such behavior on the learning of his or her peers. Consistent with the requirements
of IDEA, teams must conduct an FBA and implement a BIP that includes positive behavioral
strategies and support. The IDEA indicates that a BIP, based on an FBA, should be
considered when developing an IEP if the student’s behavior is interfering with his or her
learning or the [earning ofothers. " The Student’s behavior resulting from Emotional
Disturbance was school refusal. The Board did not include a functional behavioral
assessment and develop a behavioral intervention plan to address the triggers for Student’s
school refusal and a behavioral intervention plan to prevent or reduce these incidences of
school refusal in its December 2013 IEP and initial evaluation. As a result of this failure, the
IEP relied heavily on the Student to seek counselors or to ﬁnd ways to help herself. The
objectives relied on the Student to become aware of the triggers and come up with solutions.
While Student was easily aware of what triggered her anxiety, Student had limited progress
in ﬁnding solutions. This procedural Violation in failing to properly conduct an FBA resulted
in violation of FAPE requirements because the school refusal was not properly addressed and
Student could not make progress in her education. (Findings of Fact Nos. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16)

8. The failure to provide meaningful participation to parents as a part of the IEP process can
result in a denial of FAPE. School districts should consider input and placement options
raised by parents. See LM. v. Capistrano Unified Sch. Dist,_556 F .3d 900 (9th Cir. 2008),
cert. deniedgl30 S. Ct. 90 (2009). The Parents presented the Board With letters from mental
health providers giving insight into Student’s stressors. These providers raised the issue of a
therapeutic day placement. The Parents and Student wanted to discuss therapeutic day
placement but this was not discussed or considered as an option. The failure to discuss
information provided by Parents at the February 2014 PPT, or to consider therapeutic day
placement, impeded the Parents’ right to meaningful participation. That the Board later
recommended a therapeutic day placement is evidence of a denial of FAPE. (F indings of F act
Nos. 24, 25, 26)

9. As to the second inquiry of whether the EPS were reasonably calculated to enable the child
to receive educational beneﬁts, the IDEA does not itself articulate any speciﬁc 1evel of
educational beneﬁts that must be provided through an IEP. The Supreme Court, however,
has speciﬁcally rejected the contention that the “appropriate education“ mandated by IDEA
requires states to "maximize the potential of handicapped children” Walczak v F larida Union
Free School District, 27 IDELR 1135 (2d Cir 1998), citing Rowley, supra; KP v Juzwic, 891
F Supp 703, 71 8 (D Conn 1995). The IDEA requires "the door ofpublic education [to] be
opened for a disabled child in a “meaningful' way" Walczak, 142 F .3d at 130. However, it
does not guarantee "everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents." 1d. at 132.

15

 

April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 15-0528

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

An appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress, not
regression. Id. Whether the program is "individualized 0n the basis of the student's
assessment and performance" is also considered when determining the appropriateness of an
IEP. See AS. v. Board ofEducatian afWest Hartford, 35 IDELR 179 (D. Conn. 2001), aﬁ’d,
47 Fed. Appx. 615 (2d Cir. 2002) (citingMC. ex rel Mrs. C. v. Valuntown Bd. of Educ, 122
F.Supp.2d 289, 292 n.6 (D. Conn. 2000). The Student’s program was not individualized 0n
the basis of the Student’s functional status; it did not provide the minimum amount of
educational beneﬁt provided by state regulations, and it did not meet the unique needs of the
Student.

The February 2014 IEP did not provide FAPE because it provided less than the required
amount of home tutoring under state regulations and the PPT did not consider evaluative data
to justify providing less than the required hours of tutoring under law. R.C.S.A. 10-76d-
15(e) provides that “instruction shall be provided ...no less than two hours per day or ten
hours per week for children in grades seven through twelve. Where evaluative data indicates
that these time requirements should be modiﬁed, instruction time may be increased or
decreased upon the agreement of the parent and the board of education or upon a
determination made by the PPT as appropriate.” (Finding of Fact Nos. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
29)

The May 20 14 IEP did not provide FAPE. The IEP reduced the amount of counseling to
help Student With her school anxiety. It failed to confer meaningful educational beneﬁt by
offering less than the minimum amount of home tutoring under R.C.S.A. Sec. 10-76d-15(e).
It placed Student into the high school without any behavioral interventions directed at
Student’s school anxiety. State Guidelines contain a worksheet for designing IEPs for
Student with Emotional Disturbance. While the PPT used the worksheet to determine
eligibility, it did not use the worksheet to design an IEP. Had they done so, they could have
considered many factors that they did not consider and were not included in the IEP. For
instance, the Worksheet for designing an IEP for Students with ED included considerations
such as “crisis plan”; “behavior intervention plan”; “identiﬁcation of the responsible staff and
service implementer for each element of the IEP (i.e. “behavior intervention plan”, “family
communication”; “progress monitoring plan” “Coordination with outside agency/service
provider”). Considering some of these elements may have averted some of the Student’s
continuing difﬁculties in school. (Findings ofFact Nos. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42,

43, 44)

The November 2014 IEP placing the Student at Wheeler Clinic for the 2015-2016 school
year was inappropriate and did not provide FAPE. Wheeler was not an appropriate
placement because Student required signiﬁcant clinical services and had to be hospitalized
just a few weeks after enrolling at Wheeler. That the Student attended Wheeler consistently
does not mean that the placement is appropriate for Student’s needs. School related issues
triggered student’s behavioral and emotional problems. Student could not derive educational
beneﬁt until she had signiﬁcant clinical services, which Wheeler did not have. (Findings of
Fact Nos. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55)

When a child's behavioral and emotional problems are so closely intertwined with his
educational difﬁculties that he requires residential placement, the school board must pay for
that placement as long as it is appropriate. Mrs, B., 103 F.3d at 1114, 1122(2d Cir. 1997)
The Student’s behavioral and emotional problems are intertwined and she required

16

 

April 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 15-0528

residential treatment to receive education. (Findings of Fact No. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52,
53, 54, 55)

15. If a district fails to provide a FAPE, the child's parent may remove the child to a private
school and seek tuition reimbursement from the state. Under the Burlington-Carter
framework, a parent may recover tuition reimbursement if: (1) the proposed IEP was
inadequate to offer the child a FAPE, and (2) the private education services obtained by the
parents were reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁts. Sch.
Comm. v. Dep’t ofEduc. ofMass., 471 US. 359, 369 (1985); Carter v. Florence County Sch.
Dist. Four, 950 F.2d 156, 163 (4th Cir. 1991). Under the IDEA, a parental placement,
whether residential or not, is appropriate only if it is "reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational beneﬁts." Carter, 50 F.2d at 163. In addition to the IEP context,
evidence of actual progress is also a relevant factor to a determination of whether a parental
placement was reasonably calculated to confer some educational beneﬁt. M S ex rel.
Simchick, 553 F.3d at 327.

16. The Parents have the burden of proving the appropriateness of the unilateral placement by a
preponderance of the evidence. R.C.S.A. Sec 10-76h-14(c). The Parents have met this
burden.

17. The program at Wellspring, which included clinical services, was reasonably calculated to
enable the Student to receive educational beneﬁts and did confer educational beneﬁt. In fact,
that Student has successful reaped the beneﬁts and is able to graduate and take courses at a
community college is clear evidence that the program was effective. (Findings of Fact No.
54, 55, 56)

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board did not offer appropriate programs for the two years preceding the Due
Process Complaint.

2. The Board did not offer an appropriate program for the 2015-2016 school year and
extended school year.

3. The Student requires clinical services and residential placement for educational reasons.

4. The Board is ordered to reimburse Parents for all costs related to the residential
placement of Student at the Wellspring Foundation which includes Archbridge School
and Angelus House.

17

 

If the local 01' regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for.
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁer‘
receipt thereoﬂ the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

WW»

Héélring’bfﬁcer Signature

S rlvia H0
’ .HearingOfﬂcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 '

 

