J anuary 21, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0278

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Enﬁeld Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Courtney Spencer
The Law Ofﬁce of Courtney Spencer LLC
100 Rivewiew Center, Ste 290
Middletown CT 06457

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Should the Surrogate Parent be required to cooperate with a diagnostic placement for the
Student?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Enﬁeid Board of Education requested a special education due process hearing in this case
against the Student on December 9, 2015. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to
hear the case on December 9, 2015. A Prehearing Conference was conducted on January 5,
2016 with the Student’s surrogate parent appearing on behalf of the Student and Attorney
Christine Chinni appearing on behalf of the Board of Education.

A second Prehearing Conference was conducted on January 20, 2016. Attorney Courtney
Spencer appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Christine Chinni appeared on behalf
of the Board of Education. The parties agreed that the matter should be dismissed without
prejudice to allow time for the parties to discuss possible resolutions of the dispute.

On J anuary 20, 2016, the Student requested that the matter be dismissed without prej udice.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the request of the Student for dismissal without prejudice is granted and this
matter is dismissed without prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

coult by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@ﬁw

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

it

Am) F ENG)

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

