November 10, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0195

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

StudentI V. Hartford Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Mother, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey
21 Oak Street, Suite 601
Hartford, CT 06106

Appearing before: J anis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Mother
via Request for Impartial Specia1 Education Hearing dated October 8, 2015.2 The Board of
Education (“BOB”) received the Request for Hearing on October 14. The 30-day resolution
period ends November 13 and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is December 28.

The following issue is identified in the Request for Hearing:
Shou1d Student be placed at G1astonbury High School?

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was scheduIed for October 21. Attorney Dorsey appeared
on behalf of BOB; no one appeared on behalf of Student. Via Notice dated October 27, the pre-
hearing conference was rescheduled for November 4 and sent to Student’s Mother at the address
identiﬁed in the Request for Hearing. The Notice of Hearing stated the following in bold: “If
Student’s Mother or other representative does not either participate in the pre—hearing conference
or make appropriate arrangements to reschedule the pre—hearing conference, the matter will be
dismissed for failure to prosecute.” At the rescheduled time, Attorney Dorsey appeared on
behalf of B013; 110 one appeared on behalf of Student. The undersigned remained on the phone
for 15 minutes waiting for Student’s Mother to appear.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed for failure to prosecute.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student” and
“Student’s Mother” in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2015 unless otherwise indicated.

 

l
' A

‘ Ifthq local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
‘ .“providing special education for the student requiring spcdial education does not take

5015011 on the ﬁndings or prcsm'ption of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁcr ,
rcceipt thereof, the State Board of Educanon shall take approprifate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the, hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may bemade to state or federal

I court by either partyin accprdancc With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connooticut
Gengral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A),.

 

gain armg Officer Signature

(SPYN l5 c . .{XEqQMj’N

. He‘gs'ing Ofﬁcer Name in Print ‘

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 ,

. um

 

 

