February 17, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0275

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl v. Norwalk Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Lawrence W. Berliner
Law Ofﬁce of Lawrence Berliner, LLC
1720 Post Road East, Suite 214-E
Westport, CT 06880

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Michael McKeon
Pullman & Comley LLC
90 State House Square
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s Mother via
Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing dated December 3, 2015 .2 It was received by the Board
of Education (“BOB”) on December 7, 2015. The 30—day resolution period ended J anuary 6 and the
deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is F ebruary 20.

A telephonic pre—hearing conference was held on January 19. Student’s Mother and Student’s Advocate
appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney McKeon appeared on behalf of BOB. The following issue
was identiﬁed: Should Student be placed in an outplacement program in order to provide him with a free
appropriate public education?

Student’s Mother indicated that she also ﬁled a Complaint with the Due Process Unit alleging that BOE
failed to implement Student’s January 5, 2016 Individualized Education Program and that she expected
that issue to also be heard as part of this hearing. BOE’s Attorney objected as that issue arose after the
ﬁling of the Request for Hearing in this case. According to the Due Process Unit, the State Complaint
regarding the IEP issue was suspended pending resolution of this hearing. Therefore, Student’s Mother
was given leave until F ebruary 12 to amend the Request for Hearing to add that issue to this case.

Via email dated February 10, Attorney Berliner ﬁled an appearance on behalf of Student and indicated
that the parties participated in mediation and that they reached an agreement in principle subj eat to the
resolution of certain contingencies. He ﬁnther indicated that it may take two weeks to ﬁnalize the
agreement and withdrew the Request for Due Process Hearing without prejudice. He indicated that
BOE’s Attorney does not object to the request to withdraw.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed without prejudice.

‘ In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20
U.S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student” and “Student’s Mother” in
place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2016 unless otherwise indicated.

 

I
. .1

‘ If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
' “'Broyi'ding spacial education for the student requiring spcéial edu'can'on does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescripﬁon of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁccn days aﬁcr .
receipt thereof, the State Board of Bducatzon shall take approprifstc action to enforce the

fmdin'gs or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

‘ Appeals ﬁ‘om the hearing decision of the hemmg ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
com”: by either party in accprdancc with the provisidns ofScction 4-183, Connecticut
Gcngral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

'Emhé armg Officcr Signature

URN l3 (3. QE’E-vaw

‘ Hcéring Oﬂﬁcer Name in Print _

signpage. doc (ho d_isk)
4/1/04 ,

 

