June 1, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0471

:STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Ellington Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig S. Meuser
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the District fail to provide Student with a Free Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”) in
the Least Restrictive Environment from the date of Student’s enrollment in August, 2014
through March 6, 2015 by;

a. proposing an Individualized Education Program (“IEP”) that did not adequately
address Student’s needs; and/or

17. proposing an IEP that provided Student would be in a regular education setting for less
than 50% of the school day?

2. Did the District Violate Student’s procedural safeguards by failing to provide Parents with a
copy of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”) 01' remedies available under
the IDEA at any time Parents had discussions with the school?

3. If the District violated Student’s procedural safeguards did such violation or violations
operate to deny Student a FAPE?

4. Should the District provide Student with compensatory education?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On April 14, 2016, the Board of Education received Parent’s request for a Special Education Due
Process Hearing, On April 22, 2016, the Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss with a supporting
Memorandum of Law claiming that the Hearing Ofﬁcer lacked jurisdiction as she lacked authority to
order the relief requested by Parent. On April 24, 2016, Parent ﬁled an amended hearing request in
response to the Board’s Motion to Dismiss. Parent’s amended request was submitted without
agreement of the parties to the amendment or permission from the Haring Ofﬁcer to ﬁle an amended
request. On April 29, 2016, a prehearing conference was held during which the deadline for mailing
the Final Decision and Order was established as June 28, 2016 and the jurisdictional deﬁciencies in
Parent’s request were discussed. The Hearing Ofﬁcer ordered that Parent amend her hearing request
to address the jurisdictional deﬁciencies. On May 2, 2016, Parent ﬁled a second amended complaint,
which resulted in a revised deadline for mailing the Final Decision and Order of July 15, 2016. On
May 4, 2016, Parent indicated that she was in the process of retaining an attorney. On May 25, 2016,
the Hearing Ofﬁcer sent an email to Parent enquiring about the status of Parent’s legal representation.
Parent responded that day with an email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer in which she indicated that she was
withdrawing her hearing request without prejudice.

 

June 1, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0471

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either palty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬁf/y/H/ézéw _____

“Hearing Ofﬁcer Sighature

Beth: H. Ftton

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

