February 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0315

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Bridgeport Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Gwen Zittoun
Shipman & Goodwin LLP

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F . Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ME;
Was the Student’s behavior a manifestation of his disability?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested an expedited special education due process hearing in the above-
captioned on .1 anuary 14, 2016. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear and
decide the case on January 19, 2016. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was conducted on
January 28, 2016.

Attorney Gwen Zittoun appeared on behalf of the Board of Education. The Student did not
appear. The Board of Education reported that the matter had been resolved and that the
Student intended to Withdraw her request for a special education due process hearing. On
F ebruary 2, 2016, the Student conﬁrmed that she desired to have her request for a special
education hearing dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education 01' the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@Hiy

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

"F

HMJFEZKB

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

