January 14, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0303

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Enﬁeld Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni and Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Was the psychoeducational evaluation conducted by the District appropriate, thereby relieving
the District of the obligation to obtain an Independent Educational Evaluation (“IEE”) at public
expense, speciﬁcally an independent neuropsychological evaluation, as was requested by the
Parents at a Planning and Placement Team meeting on December 18, 2015?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On J anuary 5, 2016, the Student received a Special Education Due Process Hearing Request ﬁled
by the Enﬁeld Board of Education and the undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to the
case. The deadline for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was established as February
19, 2016. A prehearing conference was scheduled for J anuary 12, 2016, but Parents indicated
they was unable to attend due to work obligations. On J anuary 13, 2016, before the prehearing
conference could be rescheduled, Parents sent an email to the Board indicating that they were
withdrawing their request for an IEE. The Board, in response to the Parents’ withdrawal of the

request for an IEE, withdrew its Special Education Due Process Hearing Request in an email sent
on January 13,2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take apprepriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings 01‘ prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance w1th the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬂ .- 4 ,7 /

“Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

ZBr/at'h’. H. Etta m

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

