March 31, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0325

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Windsor Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attomey Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. F itton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the District deny Student a Free Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”) for that peltion
0f the 2013-2014 school year beginning on February 9, 2014 and running through the end of the
academic year?
2. Did the District deny Student a FAPE for the 2014—2015 school year?
3. Did the District deny Student a FAPE for the 2015—2016 school year?
4. Did the District commit a procedural violation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act (“IDEA”) during the period of February 9, 2014 through February 17, 2015 by:
a. suspending student multiple times;
b. not following the procedures for changing a Student’s placement under the IDEA; and/or
0. failing to conduct a manifestation determination hearing after a change in placement?
5. If the District committed one of the procedural violations listed under Issue 4, was the Student
denied a F APE as a result?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On J anuary 26, 2016, Parent ﬁled a Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing on
the form provided by the Connecticut State Department of Education for such requests. Under
the heading “Description of the nature of the issues in dispute, including related facts”, Parent
wrote the word “Complaint” followed by a number and then the word “Complaint” again
followed by another number. Under the heading “Proposed resolution (to the extent known and
available at this time)” on the fomi, Parent requested only “monetary damages”. On February 3,
2016, the Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss/Sufﬁciency Challenge.

During the preheating conference held on F ebrua1y 5, 2016, the Motion to Dismiss was
denied, and Parent was given the opportunity to amend his request to specify the issues in
dispute and include speciﬁc descriptions of the facts relating to the issues. The deadline for
mailing the Final Decision and Order was identiﬁed as April 8, 2016. Parent ﬁled an amended
request on February 9, 2016, which resulted in a new mailing deadline of April 22, 2016. Under
the heading, “Description of the nature of the issues in dispute, including related facts” on
Parent’s amended complaint he added “to CT State Board of Education” next to the Complaint
numbers and wrote “See Exhibit A (Attachment) Denial of FAPE”. Exhibit A was a two page

 

March 31, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0325

document which contained a list of 20 alleged substantive violations and 3 alleged procedural
Violations. In addition, Parent modiﬁed his proposed resolution of the issues to include a claim
for compensatory education, in addition to the original claim for monetary damages in the
amended complaint.

On February 22, 2016, the Board ﬁled a second Motion to Dismiss/Sufﬁeiency Challenge
in which the Board alleged that the amended complaint still did not contain adequate descriptions
of the issues and facts, that the Parent was still requesting an impermissible remedy of monetary
damages, and that the complaint did not make clear the time period in which the Parent was
claiming the denial of a Free Appropriate Public Education.

On F ebruary 24, 2016, the Parent ﬁled a Motion to Deny in response to the Board’s
Motion to Dismiss/Sufﬁciency Challenge. Parent claimed that the Board had actual notice of
Parent’s claims through prior complaints ﬁled with the Connecticut Commission on Human
Rights and Opportunities, the Ofﬁce for Civil Rights and the Connecticut State Department of
Education and referenced Exhibit A in support of his statement that the Board had been given
sufﬁcient information to proceed.

In her ruling on the Board’s Motion to Dismiss and the Parent’s Motion to Deny, issued
on March 18, 2016, the Hearing Ofﬁcer found that prior complaints ﬁled with other agencies and
prior hearing requests ﬁled with Connecticut State Department of Education were separate and
distinct matters and would not be incorporated by reference into the instant hearing. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer found that the inclusion of the phrase “denial of FAPE” 0n the amended request
in conjunction with the Very speciﬁc descriptions of alleged conduct by the District found in
Exhibit A, provided sufﬁcient detail for the amended request to suiyive the Board’s Motion to
Dismiss.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer went on to ﬁnd that the Attorney for the Board was correct in her
assessment that Parent did not identify a time frame for Parent’s allegations and Parent was
ordered to revise Exhibit A to include dates for any alleged incidents described and send the
revised Exhibit A to the Attorney for the Board with a copy to the Hearing Ofﬁcer. The Hearing
Ofﬁcer went on to rule that to the extent the Board’s Motion to Dismiss/Sufﬁciency Challenge
was seeking that Parent’s request be dismissed in its entirety, that motion was denied. However,
the Board’s motion to limit the hearing to the consideration of claims arising during the
applicable statute of limitations was granted and the issues set forth above were determined to be
the issues in dispute.

On March 21, 2016, Parent sent an email in which he indicated all allegations in Exhibit
A occurred before February 9, 2014. On March 28, 2016, Attorney for the Board renewed her
Motion to Dismiss given this new information. The IDEA provides that: “A parent or agency
shall request an impartial due process hearing within 2 years of the date the parent or agency
knew or should have known about the alleged action that forms the basis of the complaint, or, if
the State has an explicit time limitation for requesting such a hearing under this subchapter, in
such time as the State law allows.” 20 U.S.C. §l415(f)(3)(C) As Parent is seeking a hearing on
events Which occurred before the two years preceding the ﬁling of Parent’s amended complaint,
Parent’s claims are time—barred by the IDEA’s statute of limitations.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or p1escﬁption of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days afte1
receipt the1eof, the State Board of Education shall take appropn'ate action to enfo1ce the
ﬁndings 01 prescription of the heming ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing deeision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

“Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

Brathi H- FHOM

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

