July 25, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0597

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl v. Milford Board ofEducation
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Father, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem Moses & Devlin PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: J anis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Father Via
Request for Impaﬁial Special Education Hearing dated June 9, 2016.2 The 30—day resolution
period ended July 9 and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is August 23.

The Request for Hearing identiﬁes the f011owing issue: Did the Board of Education deny Student
a free appropriate public education when the denied Student’s Father’s request for delayed
graduation and transition services to access higher education?

A te1ephonic pre-hearing conference was scheduled for July 5. The parties were not available on
that date and requested a new date On July 6, Student’s Father indicated Via email that he
decided to withdraw the Request for Hearing.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.STC. § 1232;; (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR§ 99, this decision uses “Student”,
“Parents”, “School” and titles of school staff members and certain other witnesses in place of names and other
personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2016 unless otherwise indicated.

 

I
. f ,5

'If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for

,“providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or preemption of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁocn days aﬁcr ‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appmprigtc action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prcscription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

. Appeals Irom the hearing decision of the healing ofﬁcer may bemade to state or federal
court by either party in aocprdancc With the provisidns of Section 4-183, Connecticut
Gengral Statutes, and Titlc 20 United States‘Code 1415(1)(2)(A)..

 

écmmgW Ofﬁcer S1gnature

Q‘HN \E: C- .CSETAfo—M

. He'zlaﬁng Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04-

 

