May 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0490

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Branford Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Linda Yoder

Shipman & Goodwin LLP
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se
Appearing before: Attorney Ann F . Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Does the Student require an out of district therapeutic educational school such as Aces
Mill Road?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board of Education requested a special education due process hearing in the above-
captioned matter on April 25, 2016. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the
case on April 27, 2016. A telephonic pi'e-hearing conference was convened on May 12, 2016.
The Student’s mother appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Linda Yoder appeared
on behalf of the Board of Education. It was established that the deadline for completing the
hearing and ﬁling the ﬁnal decision and order is June 9, 2016. An evidentiary hearing was
scheduled for May 31, 2016.

On May 18, 2016, the Board of Education repotted that the case had been settled and
requested that the matter be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board of Education’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is
dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal

coult by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@ﬁw

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

en

flij (§sz

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

