January 20, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0194

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Fairﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Phillip Cohn, Esq.
Goldman, Gruder & Woods, LLC
200 Connecticut Avenue
Norwalk, CT

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Michelle Laubin, Esq.
Berchem, Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board promptly identify the Student as a student with a disability being eligible
for special education and related services under the IDEA?

2. Did the Board fail to offer FAPE in the 2014-2015 school year

Did the Board fail offer FAPE in the 2015-2016 school year?

4. If the answer to Issues 2 or 3 are no, then is Ironwood an appropriate placement for
student?

5. If Ironwood is an appropriate placement, should the Board be required to reimburse
Parents for their payment of tuition and education related costs at Ironwood?

6. Should the Board be required to reimburse parents for the costs of travel, evaluation
and therapy expenses?

7. Do the circumstances warrant an award of compensatory education?

E”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on October 9, 2015.
The Hearing Ofﬁcer conducted a Prehearing Conference on November 3, 2015. The
hearing was scheduled for January 19, 2016. At the commencement of the hearing, the
parties reported that they had executed a settlement agreement and the Parent withdrew the
Due Process Complaint With prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁel"
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropn'ate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415 (i)(2)(A).

)WWV“?

Hearing/“bfﬁcer Signature

S 'Ivia H0
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

