September 1, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0517

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student1 v. Southington Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Parents, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: J anis C. J erman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

Procedural Posture

Student’s Parents (“Parents”) ﬁled a Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing on
May 9, 20162 (HO—l). 3 The Request for Hearing was received by the Board of Education
(“BOB”) on May 10. The 30-day resolution period ended June 9 and the original deadline to mail
the ﬁnal decision and order was July 23.

On May 12, BOE ﬁled a timely Motion to Dismiss arguing that certain of the eighteen
allegations in the Request for Hearing should be dismissed for lack of standing, lack of ripeness
for review, lack of subject matter jurisdiction, and/or falling outside the two year statute of
limitations. On May 19, Parents ﬁled a timely objection to the Motion to Dismiss. The Motion to
Dismiss was granted in part and denied in part.

On May 25, BOE timely ﬁled a Sufﬁciency Challenge alleging that portions of the
Request for Hearing fail to include “a description of the nature of the problem. . .including facts
relating to such problem.” The Request for Hearing was deemed sufﬁcient under 20 U.S.C. §
1415; 34 CFR § 300.508; Connecticut State Regulations § 10—76h-3.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on June 13. Parents appeared on behalf of
Student and Attorney Meuser appeared on behalf of BOE. The following issues were identiﬁed:
1. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education
for the 2013-14 school year from the period May 10, 2014 to the end of the school
year?
2. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education
for the 2014—15 school year?

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S,C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR§ 99, this decision uses “Student,"
“Parents,” and titles of certain school staff members and witnesses in place ofnames and other personally-
identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2016 unless otherwise indicated.

3 Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibits are cited as “HO-#”; Student’s Exhibits as “P-#”; and BOE’s Exhibits as “B—#”

 

3. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public education

for the 2015-16 school year?

4. Did the Board of Education offer Student a free appropriate public education for the

2016-17 school year?

5. 1f the Board of Education did not provide Student with a free appropriate public

education, is Student’s unilateral private placement appropriate?

6. 1f the answer to Issue #5 is in the afﬁrmative, are Student’s Parents entitled to

reimbursement for the cost of the unilateral private placement?

7. 1f the answer to Issues #1, #2, #3, and/or #4 are in the negative, what shall be the

remedy?

The parties were told that they would each be given two days to present their case, for a
total of four hearing dates.

The parties were scheduled for a resolution session on June 20. Hearing was scheduled
for July 7. On June 27, Parents requested a continuance of the hearing until J uly 14, 15, or 18 to
give them more time to prepare. BOE objected to a postponement of the hearing date. The
request was granted and the J uly 7 hearing date was rescheduled for July 18.

On June 29, Parents requested an extension until Saturday, August 6 of the deadline to
mail the ﬁnal decision and order because they needed additional time to gather records, submit
witness lists and exhibits, and prepare for the hearing. The request was granted and the deadline
to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until Friday, August 5. The parties were
reminded that they would each be granted two days to present their case.

Additional hearings were scheduled for July 26 and 27. In a memorandum to the parties
and in each notice of hearing, the parties were reminded to comply with the evidentiary orders
regarding submission of witness lists and exhibits.

At the July 18 hearing, Parents requested a third hearing date to put on their evidence.
The request for an additional hearing date was denied. Hearings were held on J uly 26 and 27. At
the July 27 hearing, on the record, BOE’S Attorney requested a 30-day extension of the timeline
in order to accommodate a fourth hearing date to allow two days for each party.

Parents objected to the request for an extension because they wanted a decision issued
prior to the start of the school year and they were not available August 9-16. After fully
considering the position of all parties, the request for an extension until September 2 was granted
on the record and the last day of hearing was scheduled for August 17.

F indings of Relevant Fact4
1. Student is very bright and identiﬁed by BOB as gifted and talented (P—26, B-l, B-S',

Testimony of Father; Special Education Coordinator 1, Special Education Coordinator 2,5
School Psychologist). His IQ is in the 981h percentile (Very Superior range compared to same
aged peers) (B-l).

2. Student consistently scores very highly on assessments in many areas and his scores show
improvement from year to year. His lowest scores are in the areas of processing speed and

4 1n the Discussion, Findings of Fact are cited as “FOF-#.”

5 Special Education Coordinator 1 was the Special Education Coordinator until June 30, 2015. Special Education
Coordinator 2 replaced Special Education Coordinator 1 effective July 1, 2015. Special Education Coordinator 2
was present in the hearing room as BOE’s representative on July 18. She testiﬁed on August 17. Her testimony is
weighed accordingly.

 

executive ﬁanctioning (P-26, P-31, B—1 , B-3, B-10, B-11, B—17). These weaknesses impact
his performance in the classroom (B—l, B-2, B-3).

3. Student was found eligible for special education services under the primary disability of
Speciﬁc Learning Disability (“SLD”) on December 20, 2012 during ﬁfth grade (P-7, B-4).
An Individualized Education Program (“IEP”) was developed to provide Student with special
education services and accommodations. Parents participated in the Flaming and Placement
Team (“PPT”) meeting to develop the IEP (B-4).6

4. On April 2, 2013, the PPT met to review and revise Student’s IEP (B-6). Student’s IEP was
revised to include services to support Student in transition to middle school the following
year. The PPT recommended counseling and completion of behavior rating scales; Parents
declined these services (B—6; Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2, Special
Education Coordinator 1, Mother).

5. On April 30, 2013, Student was referred for an Occupational Therapy (“OT”) screening (B-
8). The OT screener indicated that Student was not meeting grade level expectations for
writing and recommended adaptive paper for classroom writing assignments. Notebooks with
lower case line and spacer paper were provided. A school-based OT evaluation was also
recommended.

6. At an April 30, 2013 PPT, Parents consented to an OT evaluation, which was conducted in
May 2013 (13-9, B-IO).

7. The OT evaluation report indicates that Student does not qualify for direct OT services and
made recommendations to encourage fulther development of handwriting, keyboarding and
word processing skills (B-lO).

8. In May 2013, Student underwent an independent psychological evaluation to determine if he
was struggling with executive functionng deﬁcits, whether he required additional
accommodations to address areas of academic deﬁcit, and to determine his cognitive levels
of functioning (B-1 1). The evaluator’s report was quite lengthy and “not reader—friendly.”
(Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1). Special Education Coordinator 1 thought
there was a lot of important information in the report and that it was important for the PPT to
understand. To be efﬁcient in referring to the salient points regarding Student’s needs,
Special Education Coordinator 1 prepared a summary of the report (B-12). The evaluator’s
recommendations were reviewed by the PPT and incorporated into Student’s June 14, 2013
IEP (B-13, B-16, B—18).

9. Student was provided with ﬁve weeks (20 hours) of handwriting supports during summer
2013 (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

10. In July 2013, Student was referred to an Optometrist who recommended Section 504
services, including more time on tests, leniency about handwriting, give him notes if he has
trouble copying in enough time, and limit the amount of text on a page (B—15).7

11. Optometrist’s recommendations were reviewed by the PPT and incorporated into Student’s
August 22, 2013 IEP (B-16; Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1, School
Psychologist). The IEP was amended to remove counseling services with the social worker
per Parents’ request; one vision therapy8 exercise to be conducted during the school day;

5 Parents attended and participated in all PPT meetings cited herein unless expressly indicated otherwise.

7 BOE did not receive any subsequent updates or changes in recommendations from Optometrist (Testimony of
Special Education Coordinator 1, Special Education Coordinator 2).

8 BOB believes that vision therapy is a medical service; no doctor has recommended vision therapy as an
educational service (Testimony of Director of Pupil Services, Special Education Coordinator 1, Special Education

daily manuscript handwriting practice per the OT’s recommendation; dropping social studies
to provide one daily special education support study class;9 provision of a computer for note-
taking, organizing homework, and producing written assignments when appropriate; and
continuation of recommendations from the June 14, 2013 IEP, which include 14.83 hours of
weekly special education services; math and handwriting goals and objectives; OT, general
education, and special education teachers consult 30 minutes per month; second set of books
for classes that use text books; Parent meeting every six weeks; syllabi and rubrics provided
to Student and Parents in advance; extended time for tests, assignments, projects, and written
work; and email homework assignments to Parents (B—16).

12. The purpose of mbi‘ics is to provide Student with a Visual check in the process of completing
assignments, to be able to see required components and what content he should address, and
to give him a chance to self—check and be sure he is following what is expected (Testimony
of Special Education Coordinator 1).

13. At a November 7, 2013 meeting, the PPT recommended discontinuing direct instruction in
handwriting skills due to Student’s demonstration of improved legibility and spacing and
focus on continued use of technology to access curriculum (3-18). The PPT declined
Parents’ request to remove Student from scheduled classes for Vision therapy. The resulting
IEP included accommodations recommended by a Consultant from the Board of Education
and Services for the Blind (“BESB”) (P-2; Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1,
Director of Pupil Services”).

14. At the January 30, 2014 PPT meeting, which was Student’s annual review, Parents requested
that his primary disability designation be changed from SLD to Visual Impairment (P-SS, B—
19). The PPT denied the request based on the Federal Register definition of Visual
Impairment and based on the BESB Consultant’s report and recommendations (B-19). The
BESB Consultant told Special Education Coordinator 1 that Student was not Visually
Impaired (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

15. Although Student does not meet the criteria for Visual Impairment, BOE provided services
and accommodations to meet his vision needs, including assistive technology and OT
services (Testimony of Director of Pupil Services). The PPT took Optometrist’s report into
consideration when reviewing Student’s present levels of perfonnance and in making IEP
recommendations (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1). With increased font size
and related accommodations, Student could perform successfully.l1

 

Coordinator 2). To appease Parents, a previous assistant principal agreed to provide one session of vision therapy
per day if they could locate an appropriate setting within the school building. She then determined that there was not
an appropriate location due to school renovations. Special Education Coordinator I felt that it was not appropriate to
offer because it is a medical service and had not been recommended by any doctor as an educational service
(Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

9 It is BOE’s policy to pull a student from Social Studies ifthey need suppoxts in the resource room (Testimony of
Assistant Principal). The PPT felt that Student’s knowledge is quite broad and he would not be hampered by not
having Social Studies class but would beneﬁt from reading the text. In order to satisfy Student’s inquiring mind, the
Special Education Teacher uploaded Social Studies text for Student to access with the BOE—provided laptop
(Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

‘0 Director of Pupil Services has been employed by BOB since October 20, 2014. She was present in the hearing
room as BOB’s representative on July 26, July 27, and August 17. She testiﬁed on July 26. Her testimony is
weighed accordingly.

” Student often selected font size 1 1 even though the larger size 14 was recommended. BOE set the laptop to default
to size 14 (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

 

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

At the J anuary 30, 2014 PPT meeting, goals and objectives were recommended to address
written expression with emphasis on citing evidence and sources; multiplication and
divisions skills required for efﬁcient execution of algebraic equations and ﬁ'action/decimal
operations; and organization/executive function skills. The PPT recommended removing
mastered subtraction objectives (B—19). The J anuary 30, 2014 IEP eliminated Student’s 46
minutes of suppoﬁ at Parent’s request so that he did not get pulled from Uniﬁed Arts since he
is a musician. A11 remaining supports and services remained in Student’s IEP without
modiﬁcation (B-19).

Student’s J anuary 30, 2O 14 IEP was far-ranging, reaching academics and specialized suppmt
services and was implemented in an inclusion setting (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 1). Student received additional specialized services under the oversite 0f the
Special Education Teacher.

The IEP provided Student access to a software program that converts speech to text and vice
versa (Testimony of Assistant Principal”). The program can be used for writing tasks that
might be tedious for students with executive functioning issues. The OT assisted with the
implementation of this portion of Student’s IEP.

The J anuary 30, 2014 PPT meeting lasted for three and one-half hours, which was
comparatively lengthy (B-19; Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

On April 6, 2014, Parents consented to a math reevaulation of Student (B—20).

On April 7, 2014, Student’s IEP was amended to include accommodations for the Smarter
Balanced Field Test. The accommodations included color contrast, color overlay,
magniﬁcation, masking and non-embedded calculator for calculator-allowed items (B—21;
Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

Pursuant to the IEP, BOE provided Student with a laptop for the period May 28 through J une
19, 2014 (P-11).

On May 16, 2014, Parents and BOE agreed to paiticipate in a facilitated IEP (B—23). BOE
members of the PPT felt that Parents were not satisﬁed no matter what they did and thought
that an independent facilitated PPT meeting might improve the relationship and make Parents
satisﬁed (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).13

On June 3, 2014, Parents submitted a Request for IEP Facilitation. On June 10, 2014, BOE
submitted the Request to Attorney Howard Klebanoff to seive as the facilitator.

At the conclusion of his sixth grade year (June 2014), Student’s grades ranged from B+ t0
A+ (B-30).

The PPT met on September 25, 2014 at the request of Parents (P-59, B-25; Testimony of
Special Education Coordinator 1). Parents expressed concern about homework assignments,
wanted assurance that Student’s planner was enlarged, and wanted to specify how time was
split for special education (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

The PPT adopted certain recommendations in response to Parents’ concerns, including:
teacher will email parents same day that Student is missing a homework assignment;
enlarged planner, worksheets, and daily announcements; direct support and instruction in

12 In Februaly 2014, Assistant Principaljoined BOB Middle School staff. In that capacity, she is responsible for
supervising special education teachers and paraprofessionals; she attends all PPTs, including those for ﬁﬁh graders
transitioning into sixth grade (Testimony of Assistant Principal).

'3 There were delays in scheduling the facilitated PPT due to Parents’ speciﬁc requests about and objections to
celtain facilitators and by the personal schedule of the agreed-upon facilitator (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 1).

 

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33,

34.

organizational strategies; provision of math binder with hole—punched pocket folders and
dividers to assist with organizational strategies; academic support in literacy, writing, and
math; BOE to provide Student with laptop with programs to support his executive
functioning needs; Learning Specialist to upload Social Studies book to laptop; enlarge
worksheets to size 14 font or larger; teachers to use dark markers on whiteboard; extension of
homework due dates to ﬁve days beyond original due date; Week in a Peek” email to
Parents; accommodations for Smaiter Balanced Field Test to meet his vision needs 13—25).
Because Student is a twice exceptional student, the PPT wanted him to focus on developing
his strengths as well as weaknesses. The Math Coordinator directly oversaw Student’s Math
support and enrichment program (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

The PPT declined Parents’ requests for direct instruction in manuscript and cursive writing,
vision therapy, and reimbursement for instrumental music tutoring (P-9, B-25).

Parents requested that Student’s primary disability category be changed from SLD to Other
Health Impaired (“0H1”) based on his Vision impairment (P-9; Testimony of Mother). The
PPT declined the request because there was no diagnosis indicating that Student had a health
issue or medical diagnosis of Visual Impairment (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 1, Director of Pupil Services).

Pursuant to the IEP, BOE provided Student with a laptop and software for the period
November 3, 2014 through June 20, 2015 (P—l O). The provided software was requested by
Parents, was expensive, and was not in use in the district prior to Parents’ request (Testimony
of Special Education Coordinator 1).

On December 5, 2014, Student was involved in an incident in his resource room that resulted
in disciplinary action. Student was suspended for three days (B-26; Testimony of Mother,
Father, Director of Pupil Sewices). Following this incident, Mother requested that Student be
removed from the resource room because she felt that the Case Manager in that room did not
have good classroom management (Testimony of Mother). Student was removed at Mother’s
request. For the following three weeks, during his resource period, Student sat in the teacher
leader’s ofﬁce to receive his IEP services and to make up missed work from being suspended
for three days. He went from a sma11 group setting to one—on-one for those three sessions. He
then worked With a paraprofessional in the school counselor’s conference room because
Parents did not want him in the resource room (Testimony of Assistant Principal).

The PPT met on J anuary 16, 2015 to conduct Student’s annual review (P—22, P-23, P-61, B-
27). Parents did not attend due to schedule conﬂicts and notiﬁed BOE that morning; BOE
made attempts to reschedule (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1, Director of
Pupil Services). The PPT conducted a record review and considered teacher reports and
assessments, including present levels of achievement and performance. Services, supports,
and accommodations from the September 25, 2014 IEP remained in place (B—27).

In preparation for the facilitated PPT meeting, Special Education Coordinator I asked
Parents for input into the agenda; they did not provide anything in advance (Testimony of
Special Education Coordinator 1). Special Education Coordinator 1 prepared an agenda
based on what she felt the PPT wanted to achieve. The agenda included introductions,
procedural safeguards, facilitator’s guidelines, extent of Student’s participation in meeting,

14 Week in a Peek is a weekly syllabus showing what will be conducted in the coming week so that Student can see
it ahead of time and Parents can see in advance what Student will be learning. This allows Parents to support Student
with his assignments and they can make sure he has what he needs or let school know if something was paiticularly
difﬁcult (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

 

35.

36.

37‘

38.

39.

40.

411

42.

43.

44.

review of performance, review of current accommodations, recommendations, home/school
communication, and after school suppmt (B-29).

On March 27, 2015, the parties participated in a facilitated PPT meeting conducted by
Attorney Klebanoff (P-25, B-23, B—29; Testimony of Father). Parents were represented by an
attorney at the facilitated PPT which lasted three hours (Testimony of Father, Special
Education Coordinator 1, Director of Pupil Services).

Parents brought a written list of agenda items to the facilitated PPT meeting (B-29). Parents’
agenda items were incorporated into the meeting (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 1).

The facilitator initiated dialogue about items, put notes on a whiteboard, and solicited
responses from the parties (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

The facilitator recommended a private neuropsychological evaluation, to Which Parents
agreed. The PPT recommended that Student’s planner be in an electronic format; that a View
of the planner be emailed to Parents daily; suppofts for literacy, math, language alts, science,
world language during the remainder of seventh grade; supports for literacy, math, language
alts, science, world language during eighth grade; continue existing accommodations for
enlarged materials; ﬁve day extended deadline for homework; use of laptop and related
software to support executive functioning, reading, and writing needs; Week in a Peek
emailed to Parents; and Visual suppmt accommodations for the Smaiter Balanced Field Test.
Student was also provided with specialized transportation (B—29).

At the end of the facilitated PPT meeting, Middle School Principal asked Parents if all of
their concerns were addressed and they responded yes (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 1).

The March 27, 2015 facilitated IEP was designed to support Student through the remainder
of seventh grade and to be carried over to eighth grade (B—29; Testimony of Special
Education Coordinator 1).

A neuropsychological evaluation was conducted on May 4, 2015 (P—27, B-3 1). The
evaluation conﬁrmed previous assessments indicating that Student is very bright, scores in
the superior or higher range on many tests, and has weaknesses in processing speed, working
memory capacity, executive functioning, and focused attention.

The neuropsychological evaluation recommended that Student continue to qualify for special
education; that current services continue with particular emphasis on executive functioning;
extended time for in—class and standardized tests in an environment free from distractions;
access to a word processor for extended writing assignments and exams; occupational
therapy to strengthen ﬁne motor skills and increase his stamina for note—taking; assistance in
getting started on unfamiliar and less structured tasks; guidance in alticulating alternative
approaches to a task; assistance in building stronger meta-cognitive skills; seated in less
distracting area of classroom in proximity to teacher for prompting; chunking tasks; reduce
distracting materials on his desk; provide Visual and oral instructions; daily planner; and
organizational suppmts (P—27, B-31).

BOE staff did not have direct communication with the author of the evaluation report and did
not request speciﬁc recommendations be included (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 2).

At the conclusion of his seventh grade year (J une 2015), Student’s grades ranged from B— to
A+ (B—30). Student’s grades, scores, and assessments indicate that he improved from sixth
grade to seventh grade and that he is way above his peers. His literacy and math assessment

 

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

results were at the highest level. Special Education Coordinator 1 was “blown away” by his
outstanding progress (P-26; Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

Pursuant to the IEP, BOE provided Student with a laptop for the period July 14 through
August 27, 2015 (P—12).

The PPT met on August 20, 2015 (B-32). The purpose of the PPT was to review the results
of the neuropsychological evaluation and recommendations and to adjust Student’s IEP as
necessary (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2). The PPT reviewed the evaluation
and recommendations, and responded to Parents’ questions. The PPT lasted nearly two hours
(T estimony of Special Education Coordinator 2).

The PPT changed Student’s primary disability category to OHI-ADD/ADHD based on the
recommendation of the neuropsychological evaluation and the agreement of the PPT (B-32;
Testimony of Director of Pupil Services, Special Education Coordinator 2). There are some
differences but the overall suppoﬁs needed are similar for the labels of SLD and OHI—
ADD/ADHD (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2). Student’s difﬁculty honing in
on one thing and struggling with attention to task is consistent with an OHI-ADD label.
Parents were given an opportunity to ask questions and did not object to the change in
category at the PPT meeting (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2). The only
concern Parents raised at the PPT meeting was to request vision therapy, which was again
denied.

The PPT updated Student’s goals and objectives and accommodations and supports based on
his present levels of performance and to reﬂect recommendations from the
neuropsychological evaluation. The PPT extended Student’s deadline to complete homework
assignments to be seven days after the original due date. The PPT recommended counseling
supports, consistent with the neuropsychological evaluation. Parents refused counseling for
Student (Testimony of Mother, Special Education Coordinator 2).

At the August 20, 2015 PPT meeting, Parents read a prepared statement rejecting the eighth
grade IEP and indicating that they intended to unilaterally place Student at a parochial school
(P-30, B—32; Testimony of Mother, Father, Special Education Coordinator 2). Student did not
attend BOE’s Middle School for eighth grade. Parents unilaterally placed him at a parochial
school (Testimony of Mother, Father).

BOE participated in development of a service plan for Student while unilaterally placed at
the parochial school (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2).

Student participated in achievement testing as palt of his triennial evaluation in May 2016
(B-33). Different assessments were completed so as to not repeat any previously done
(Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2). His scores were consistently in the above
average and superior range with the exception of those impacted by a time element. Student’s
untimed numerical operations results were 98%. He needs time to correctly compute to be
able to solve higher level algorithms (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2).

BOE conducted a record review, behavior rating scales, and executive functioning rating
scales as part of his triennial evaluation in May 2016 (B-34). The Behavior Rating Inventory
of Executive Functioning (“BRIEF”) and Behavior Assessment for Children Second Edition
(BASC-Z) were administered.

Results of the BRIEF assessment which was completed by two teachers, Student, and
Parents, indicate that Student is in the average range for behavioral regulation and that he
may have difﬁculty sustaining working memory with a negative impact on his ability to
remain focused; holding information in active memory for processing, encoding, or mental

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

manipulation; planning and organizing information which has a negative impact on his
problem solving; and keeping materials organized and readily available (B-34).

Results of the BASC—2 assessment, which was completed by two teachers, indicates that
Student is in the average range for externalizing and internalizing problems, attention
problems, emotional symptoms, functional communication, and personal adjustment; has
some difﬁculty maintaining attention at school; generally displays clear, logical thought
patterns; may at times avoid social situations or appear to be alone; has difﬁculty adapting to
changing situations, recovering from difﬁcult situations, and making decisions; may be at-
risk in interpersonal relationships (B-34).

The PPT met on June 3, 2016 to plan an IEP for Student’s ninth grade year (P—62, B-35). The
parochial school Regular Education Teacher and Principal attended and shared their
observations of Student’s performance. The PPT reviewed Student’s performance and spring
2016 assessments. The PPT determined that Student is eligible for special education under
the primary disability category of OHI—ADD/ADHD. The resulting IEP included
academic/cognitive and gross/ﬁne motor skills goals and objectives; accommodations and
modiﬁcations consistent with evaluation recommendations and Student’s present levels of
performance (B—35).

The June 3, 2016 PPT meeting was long and gave everyone plenty of time to discuss the IEP
(Testimony of School Psychologist, Special Education Coordinator 2).

Student’s annual review occurs in J away each year (B-19; Testimony of Director of Pupil
Services, Special Education Coordinator 1).

Student’s IEP does not stop at the end of the school year (Testimony of Director of Pupil
Services). The IEP is designed to address Student’s needs for the remainder of the then
current academic year as well as the ﬁrst half of the next academic year.

Conclusions of Law

1.

k1]

BOE found Student to be eligible for special education and related services as deﬁned in the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”), 20 U.S.C. § 1401, et seq.; Connecticut
General Statutes § 10—76a, et seq.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer has the authority (A) to conﬁrm, modify, or reject the identiﬁcation,
evaluation 01' educational placement of or the provision of a free appropriate public education
(“FAPE”) to the child or pupil, (B) to determine the appropriateness of an educational
placement where the parent or guardian of a child requiring special education has placed the
child or pupil in a program other than that prescribed by the PPT, or (C) to prescribe alternate
special educational programs for the child. Connecticut General Statutes § 10-76h(d)(1).
Student has the burden of production in a special education due process hearing. Connecticut
State Regulations § 10—76h-14.

BOE has the burden of proving the appropriateness of a student’s program or placement by a
preponderance of the evidence. Connecticut State Regulations § 10—76h—14.

The PPT includes the parents of a child with a disability. 34 CFR § 300.321.

Where parents allege a procedural Violation under the IDEA, a Hearing Ofﬁcer may ﬁnd a
denial of FAPE if the violation 1) impeded the child's right to FAPE; 2) signiﬁcantly
impeded the parents' opportunity to participate in the decision—making process regarding the
provision of FAPE; 01' 3) caused a deprivation of educational beneﬁts. 20 U.S.C. §
1415(t)(3)(E); 34 CFR § 300.513(a); Winkelman V. Parma City Sch. Dist, 127 S. Ct. 1994,
2001 (2007),

7. The standard for determining whether FAPE has been provided is a two-pronged inquiry:
ﬁrst, whether the procedural requirements of IDEA have been met, and second, whether the
IEP is reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁts. Board of
Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176 (1982).

8. The proper gauge for determining educational progress is “whether the educational program
provided for a child is reasonably calculated to allow the child to receive ‘meaningful’
educational beneﬁts.” Mrs. B. v. Milford Board of Education, 103 F.3d 1114, 1120 (2d Cir.
1997)

9. An appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is “likely to produce progress, not
regression.” Walczak v. Florida Union Free Sch. Dist. 142 F .3d 119, 130 (2d Cir. 1998). The
IDEA does not require that the school district provide the best available educational program
or one that maximizes a student‘s educational potential. Mrs. B. v. Milford Bd. of Educ., 103
F.3d1114, 1121 (2d Cir. 1997).

10. Factors to be considered in determining whether an IEP is reasonably calculated to provide a
meaningful educational beneﬁt is whether the proposed program is individualized on the
basis of the student's assessment and performance and whether it is administered in the least
restrictive environment. 20 U.S.C. §1412(a)(5)(A); 34 CFR § 300.114(a); A.S. v. Board of
Education of West Hanford, 35 IDELR 179 (D. Conn. 2001), affd, 47 Fed. Appx. 615 (2d
Cir. 2002); MC. ex rel. Mrs. C. v. Voluntown Bd. of Educ., 122 F.Supp.2d 289, 292 n.6
(D.Gonn. 2000).

11. At the beginning of each school year, BOE must have an IEP in effect for each child with a
disability. 34 CFR § 300.323(a).

12. A student’s IEP must be reviewed not less than annually and revised as appropriate. 34 CFR
§300.324(b).

13. The proposed program or placement must be reviewed in light of the information available to
the PPT at the time the IEP was developed. B. L. v. New Britain Bd. of Educ., 394 F. Supp.
2d 522, 537 (D. Conn. 2005).

 

 

Discussion

Each of the issues identiﬁed in this case is addressed in this Discussion section. All of the
parties’ arguments and evidence have been reviewed and considered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer and
are not necessarily individually addressed here. Ceitain arguments and claims will be addressed
for illustrative purposes.

Parents’ allegations and concerns center on several areas:

That they were not treated asfull members of the PPT in that they were not invited to all
PPT meetings, IEPs were pre—plannedprior to PPT meetings, and they were not given materials
to review in advance of PPT meetings in order to be prepared to participate, The credible
evidence suppoits a ﬁnding that Parents were invited to all PPT meetings; had an opportunity to
ask questions, present recommendations, and invite advocates or other relevant professionals to
participate; that certain of their requests were implemented; and that they had time at PPT
meetings and before IEPs were implemented to raise additional concerns. There is also credible
evidence that the PPT convened regularly at Parents’ request. See, FOF-3, FOF—4, FOF-l 1, F OF—
13, FOF-14, FOF-26, FOF-35, FOF—46, FOF-55.

That IEPS were not fully or timely implemented; that "BOE writes things down but they
do not come to fruition. " This allegation will be addressed below under each section as
appropriate.

10

 

Thar BOE did not develop andpur into place a new IEP by June 30 of each year. lEPs do
not expire at the end of each school year. The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(“IDEA”) requires BOE to have an IEP in effect at the beginning of each school year for each
child with a disability. 34 CFR § 300.323(a). The credible evidence supports a ﬁnding that BOE
had an IEP in effect for Student at the beginning of each school year at issue in this case. See,
FOF-l 1, FOF-14, FOF—21,FOF-46, FOF—55, FOF-SS.

Thar BOE ’s actions were for the purpose ofgetfingfunding and not in Student ’5 best
interests. The credible evidence supports a ﬁnding that PPT decisions were not based on funding
but were based on providing Student with FAPE.. For example, at Parents’ request, BOE
purchased an expensive software package for Student that was not in use elsewhere in the district
(Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1). There is no credible evidence that the PPT
recommended services strictly based on which educator had time available to provide services,
The credible evidence supports a ﬁnding that the services, suppolts, and accommodations were
tailored to Student’s needs, as discussed below.

Thar BOE interfered with their communications with BOE staff Parents allege that they
were not treated as partners in the IEP process, that BOE blocked their family email address, and
that administrators ﬁltered their emails so that they were not delivered directly to the staff to
whom they were addressed (Testimony of Mother, Father).

BOE’s Technology Analyst credibly testiﬁed that he did learn that the email server,
which is operated by an outside vendor, automatically blocked one of Parent’s email addresses
because the server thought the email was sending spam. Technology Analyst testiﬁed that
sometimes legitimate emails will set off ﬂags in the server and will get blocked without any
human intervention. Technology Analyst credibly testiﬁed that he was never asked to block
Parents’ email address.

Parents were able to communicate with BOE administrators and teachers via other
personal email addresses (Testimony of Mother, Father). BOE administrators regularly
communicated with Parents via email and were never asked to block Parents’ email (Testimony
of Special Education Coordinator 1, Director of Pupil Services). Parents regularly copied many
people on emails; BOE staff would discuss who should respond to cut down on confusion
(Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1).

In early 2015, emails from Parents to BOE staff were rerouted to go directly to Middle
School Principal, Assistant Principal, and Special Education Coordinator 1 (P-18; Testimony of
Mother). Those administrators reviewed the emails and forwarded them to the appropriate staff
for a timely response. BOE took this action because staff were upset about the tone of Parents’
emails, including what they considered inappropriate comments about staff members, and
because the emails often included recipients who were not the most appropriate to be involved or
to respond, This process enabled teachers to focus on Student’s needs and teaching instead of
difﬁcult emails from Parents (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1). The
administrators ensured that any issues related directly to Student and his education were
addressed by the appropriate staff person (Testimony of Assistant Principal). There is credible
evidence in the record that Student’s education did not suffer as a result of the rerouting of
emails and Parents’ concerns were timely addressed.

That BOE harassed Student in retaliationfor Parents ﬁling multiple agency complaints
against BOE administralars and Board Members and for Parents ’ persistent advocacyfor
Student. BOE administrators recognize Parents’ vigorous advocacy on behalf of Student. Parents
did not produce evidence that any of their advocacy or complaints against BOE ofﬁcials in any

11

 

way impacted Student’s educational program or the provision of FAPE. Administrators working
directly with Student and his educational program did not witness any bullying, harassment, or
discrimination or receive complaints of such (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2,
Special Education Coordinator 1, Director of Pupil Services)

Special Education Coordinator 1 testiﬁed that Parents are “loving advocating parents.”
She acknowledged Parents’ frustration and lack of trust of certain administrators and wished that
all parties could communicate together and work together. There is credible evidence in the
record that any frustration felt about Parents’ advocacy had no negative impact on Student’s
education.

I. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public
education for the 2013—14 school year from the period May 10, 2014 to the end of the

school year?

Parents allege that Student’s sixth grade curriculum was not accessible to Student. As
examples, Mother cited incidents where Student received poor quality copies of materials and
where he said he had to take scissors and a glue stick to school to cut and paste materials onto
cardboard to access his cumiculum (Testimony of Mother, Father). Father testiﬁed that Student
has bifocals and it was difﬁcult for him to read the cut out articles. Mother complained to school
administrators (Testimony of Mother). Special Education Coordinator 1 acknowledged that
Mother complained about the quality of copies made for Student, that it may have taken more
time for music materials to be enlarged, and that some staff were better than others at
implementing the enlargement requirement at the beginning. When Special Education
Coordinator I learned about the situation, she immediately remedied it (Testimony of Special
Education Coordinator 1).

Parents also allege that no textbooks were provided to Student in sixth grade. Mother
went to a BOE board meeting to complain about the availability of textbooks (Testimony of
Mother, F ather). Not all classes have textbooks (Testimony of Assistant Principal). BOE was
using fewer textbooks and more original articles and online sources to access common core
curriculum until textbooks were written to support the new curriculum (Testimony of Special
Education Coordinator 1).

Due to the statute of limitations, the scope of this issue is limited to the short time from
May 10, 2014 to the end of the school year in June 2014. There is no evidence that the
complained of actions took place during that time period. Special Education Coordinator 1
credibly testiﬁed that she learned about certain of Parent’s concerns in fall of Student’s sixth
grade year (fall 2013) and remedied them.

The IEP in place from May 10, 2014 to the end of the school year included the following
services and supports:

0 Goals and objectives to address written expression with emphasis on citing evidence
and sources; math skills, multiplication and division skills required for efﬁcient
execution of algebraic equations, and fraction/decimal operations; and
organization/executive function skills;

- F ive hours per week Language Arts support for double block;

0 Three hours per week Math support;

0 Two hours per week Science suppmt;

12

 

o 3.83 hours per week suppolt study in lieu of Social Studies. The support study will
address math skill building, development of technological and self—organization skills
and homework;

0 One hour per week organizational skills support;

0 46 minutes support study every 3 days Uniﬁed Arts rotation per Parents’ request for
no Family/Consumer Science;

a One hour per month consultation among OT, general education, and special education
teachers;

- Online Science resources and Social Studies reading material continue to be made
available Via laptop (Special Education Case Manager to send passwords to Parents);

I Google Read/Write Text Help installed on laptop provided to Student and
implemented to assist with reading/vwiting assignments;

- Continue implementing Google Voice Extension;

- Continued use of accommodations recommended by BESB Consultant as included on
page eight of IEP;

0 Continue enlarged font for all music sheets and use wider music stand;

0 Continue to reinforce Student’s expected use of large font and brightness contrast
provided for reading materials and his wearing of eyeglasses;

0 Continue to receive extended time for all tests, projects, and timed work;

0 Continue providing rubrics for Student’s use to suppoﬁ independence in executing
sequential procedures in academic tasks;

o Continue providing Student with a second set of books for home use for classes that
require text books;

0 Continue providing information regarding maj 01' assignments along with their rubrics
and due dates to Student and Parent ahead of time via email and hard copy, including
permissions forms and school activity notices; The PPT declined Parents’ request for
direct handwriting skills, including cursive writing and will continue to encourage
Student to generalize directly taught handvsn‘iting skills in written work and to
reference handwriting rubric entered in his laptop by OT;

0 Continue to focus on use of technology for successful production of Student work;

- Accommodations and modiﬁcations to materials/books/equipment,
tests/quizzes/assessments, organization, environment, behavioral interventions and
supports, and instructional strategies.

Special Education Coordinator 1 credibly testiﬁed that the PPT solicited Parents’ input,
incorporated recommendations from evaluators, reviewed present levels of performance, and
discussed and updated Student’s sewices and accommodations to meet his needs. Special
Education Coordinator 1 also credibly testiﬁed, with examples, that Student’s IEP goals and
objectives and accommodations supported his progress. Student’s IEP for the period May 14,
2014 to the end of his sixth grade year included appropriate recommendations and
accommodations tailored to Student’s needs and was implemented in an inclusion setting.

BOE provided Student FAPE for the 2013-14 school year from the period May 10, 2014
to the end of the school year.

11. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public
education for the 2014-15 school year?

13

 

Student’s January 30, 2014 IEP did not stop at the end of the school year but was
designed to address his needs for the remainder of sixth grade and the beginning of seventh grade
(F OF—58). Effective for the 2014—15 school year, the IEP provides for the services,
accommodations, modiﬁcations, and suppmts identiﬁed above in Issue One (pages 18-19) with
these changes for seventh grade:

0 Language Aits suppmt reduced from ﬁve to three hours per week due to no double

block of Language Arts in seventh grade;

- Elimination of 46 minutes support study during Uniﬁed Arts per Parents’ request.

The PPT determined that the IEP was working successfully for Student and it was
continued (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1). At the conclusion of his sixth grade
year, Student’s grades ranged from B+ to A+ (FOF-25).

The PPT met on September 25, 2014 at Parents’ request and adopted additional
recommendations: teacher will email parents same day that Student is missing a homework
assignment; planner enlarged and made more accessible to meet his needs; direct support and
instruction in organizational strategies during academic support time; see Literacy Specialist in a
one—on—one setting two days a week for writing support; see the Math Coordinator for
enrichment in a one-on-one setting two days a week; see the Learning Specialist in a small group
setting for academic support one day a week; provision of math binder with hole-punched pocket
folders and dividers to assist with organizational strategies; Learning Specialist to upload Social
Studies book to laptop; BOE to provide Student with laptop with programs to support his
executive functioning needs; continue to enlarge worksheets to size 14 font or larger; teachers
continue to use dark markers on whiteboard; continue to receive enlarged copies of daily
announcements; extension of homework due dates to ﬁve days beyond original due date; Week
in a Peek email to Parents; accommodations for Smarter Balanced Field Test to meet his vision
needs include color contrast, color overlay, magniﬁcation, and masking (FOF-26, FOF-27).

BOE implemented the revised IEP and ordered a laptop and software for Student, which
was delivered to him on November 3, 2014 (FOF—3 1). Parents allege that it took too long to
provide Student with the laptop and related software. BOE’s Technology Analyst credibly
testiﬁed that the required laptop was not readily available and had to be ordered. There was an
issue with the original computer order and so it took time. Once it was received, it had to be
specially conﬁgured and then speciﬁc software loaded.

Special Education Coordinator 1 credibly testiﬁed that they knew that technology was the
way to go for Student; that she followed up with the consultant Parents spoke to in identifying
appropriate software; that she arranged for the consultant to come out and demo the software for
several staff; that they recommended purchasing it for Student; that the software programs that
were requested by Parents were new to the district; that it took time to obtain the technology and
train staff to use and implement; and that there were glitches that were worked out. Parents
allege that it took months; records indicate that it was less than six weeks between the PPT
meeting and Student’s receipt of the conﬁgured laptop.

On a couple of occasions when Student had difﬁculty accessing textbooks, he asked for
assistance in getting them loaded to his Bookshare account. When Parents expressed concern
about Student’s access, Technology Analyst assisted Student in resolving the issue and provided
a document for Parents and Students to reference at home for help (Testimony of Assistant
Principal).

14

 

Parents allege that the resource room was “free play,” that Student sat there “waiting for
the bell to ring,” and that the classroom was not properly managed. BOE administrators were not
aware of these allegations prior to hearing (Testimony of Director of Pupil Sewices). BOE
administrators testiﬁed as to the supports and services that Student received and the progress he
made as a result. In addition to supporting Student with his IEP goals and objectives and
academic support, he was provided enrichment activities in the resource room.

On December 5, 2014, Student was involved in an incident involving BOE data (PDF—
32).15 Following this incident, Mother requested that Student be removed from the resource room
because she felt that the Case Manager in that room did not have good c1assroom management.
Student was removed at Mother’s request. For the following three weeks, during his resource
period, Student sat in the teacher leader’s ofﬁce to receive his IEP services and to make up
missed working from being suspended for three days. He went from a small group setting to one-
on-one for those three sessions. He then worked with a paraprofessional in the school
counselor’s conference room because Parents did not want him in the resource room (FOF-32).

Student’s annual review was scheduled for J anuary 16, 2015; Parents did not attend
(FOF-33). The PPT met without Parents, as scheduled, to conduct a records review and then
continued Student’s existing IEP until a PPT could be scheduled with Parents in attendance. A
facilitated PPT was held on March 27, 2015 (FOF-35). The facilitated PPT lasted three hours.
Parents, who were represented by an attorney, had an opportunity to discuss their concerns and
BOE staff responded to Parents’ questions.

Parents agreed to a private neuropsychological evaluation for Student (F OF-38). The
facilitated IEP also provided that Student’s planner be in an electronic format with a checklist
that Student can edit to track due dates, missing assignments, and upcoming assignments; daily
announcements to be embedded in electronic checklist; View of the planner to be emailed to
Parents daily; see Literacy Specialist one-on—one three days a week for 46 minutes focusing on
writing support, organization, and executive functioning skills; see Math Specialist for
enrichment in a one-on—one setting two days a week (110 special education hours); Math support
in an inclusion setting three hours per week; Language Arts support in an inclusion setting for
three hours per week; Science supp01t in an inclusion setting two hours per week; World
Language (Spanish) no special education hours; continue to enlarge worksheets to size 14 font or
larger; continue to use dark markers on Whiteboards; continued use of laptop and related
software to support executive functioning, reading, and writing needs; ﬁve day extended
deadline for homework; Week in a Peek emailed to Parents; accommodations for 2015 Smarter
Balanced Field Test to meet his vision needs include color contrast, color overlay, magniﬁcation,
and masking; continue specialized transportation; continued provision of math binder with hole—
punched pocket folders and dividers to assist with organizational strategies; and graph paper to
be inc1uded in binder (FOF—3 8).

The March 27, 2015 facilitated IEP was designed to support Student through the
remainder of seventh grade and to be carried over to eighth grade (FOF—40). The PPT had
speciﬁc conversations about both seventh and eighth grade during the facilitated meeting to
ensure that they were differentiating between those years and what Student needed (Testimony
of Special Education Coordinator 1).

'5 Following the incident, Student’s laptop was taken by BOB to examine and determine whether the data was
compromised. Parents allege that Student did not have access to the laptop for an unreasonably extended time during
the investigation. One school day following the incident, BOE Superintendent indicated that the laptop could be
returned to Student (P-16). Student was without the laptop for a brief time (Testimony of Technology Analyst).

15

Although at the PPT meeting they agreed to the ﬁve day extension for completing
assignments, Parents later complained about it. Parents allege that ﬁve days is not reasonable,
that it is arbitrary, and that Assistant Principal randomly picked that time frame without any
basis. Parents did not offer a speciﬁc time frame but felt it should be open—ended.

Special Education Coordinator 1 testiﬁed that the state standard is to provide one and
one-half times as long for assignments. The PPT did not feel that worked well for Student. In
order to give him sufﬁcient time and to get meaningful feedback from teachers on his work, the
PPT agreed to ﬁve days. Beyond the ﬁve day period, class discussion would have moved on and
the extra time would not be meaningful (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1). Given
the supp01ts, services, and modiﬁcations provided to Student, as well as his present levels of
performance, the ﬁve day period is reasonable (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 1,
Special Education Coordinator 2).

At the conclusion of his seventh grade year, Student’s grades ranged from B- to A+
(FOF—40). Student was enrolled in Advanced Math in seventh grade. It is a more rigorous
curriculum than regular math and will allow Student to move into eighth grade algebra instead of
pre—algebra (B-30; Testimony of Assistant Principal).

The PPT solicited Parents’ input, inc01porated recommendations from evaluators,
reviewed present levels of performance, and discussed and updated Student’s services and
accommodations to meet his needs. Student’s IEP goals and obj ectives and accommodations
supported his progress. During the 2014—15 school year, Student’s lEPs included appropriate
recommendations and accommodations tailored to Student’s needs and were implemented in an
inclusion setting. BOE provided Student FAPE for the 2014—1 5 school year.

111. Did the Board of Education provide Student with a free appropriate public
education for the 2015-16 school year?

Pursuant to the March 27, 2015 IEP, Student had a neuropsychological examination on
May 4, 2015 (F OF-41, FOF-42). The evaluator’s report was received by BOB in late summer
and a PPT was convened on August 20, 2015 to review the results and recommendations and to
adjust Student’s IEP as necessary (FOF-46). At the two hour meeting, the PPT changed
Student’s primaiy disability category to OHI—ADD/ADHD and updated Student’s goals and
objectives and accommodations and supports based on his present levels of performance and to
reﬂect recommendations from the neuropsychological evaluation. Review of Student’s present
levels of performance and his assessments indicated that he was making gains and that the
services were supporting him in making meaningful progress (F OF-46, FOF-47, FOF—48).

Although Parents had requested multiple times to have Student’s primary disability
category changed from SLD to OHI, they disagreed with the change because they wanted it to be
OHl—Visual Impairment (Testimony of Mother, Father). Parents provided no medical records or
diagnosis indicating that Student met the deﬁnition of Visual Impairment. The change in
category was consistent with the evaluator’s recommendation (Testimony of Director of Pupil
Services). Student’s services are tied to his speciﬁc needs; not the label (Testimony of Director
of Pupil Services, Special Education Coordinator 1).

Effective for the 2015-16 school year, the IEP provides for the services,
accommodations, modiﬁcations, and supports identiﬁed above in Issue Two (pages 22) with
these changes for eighth grade:

- Page 7: Update goal #1 evaluation criteria and discontinue goal #2 Math;

16

 

0 Page 8: reﬂect recommendation in neuropsychological evaluation report;
a Page 11: reﬂect discontinued Math goal; add academic support class three hours per
week; reﬂect organization and executive function skills support ﬁve hours per week
in Science and Math; add OT consult;
- Continue specialized transportation;
0 Recommend counseling supports for social skills per neuropsychological report
recommendation (Parent refused counseling);
- Reconvene in December 2015 for annual and triennial review;
I Provide Student with seven days beyond original due date for missed homework
assignments;
0 Continue home/school electronic communication.
The only concern Parents raised at the PPT meeting was to request Vision therapy (FOF-
47), They then read a prepared statement indicating that they intended to unilaterally place
Student at a parochial school (FOF-49). BOE staff felt that BOE could provide Student FAPE
and refused Parents’ request to place Student in a private or parochial school (Testimony of
Special Education Coordinator 2). Student did not attend BOE’s Middle School for eighth grade.
Father testiﬁed that Parents’ concern was not with the IEP itself but “with the people” at BOE.

Student’s weaknesses are in executive functioning, organizing his work, and planning
how long a task will be. His IEP provides direct instruction to help him plan how long an
assignment should take, how to break it down into smaller tasks, timing his projects, using a
calendar to plan, and how to plan to complete his work (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 2). Each of these areas are addressed through his IEP goals and objectives and
accommodations (B-32).

The proposed 2015-16 IEP included appropriate recommendations and accommodations

tailored to Student’s needs and were proposed to be implemented in an inclusion setting.

BOE participated in development of a service plan for Student while unilaterally placed

at the parochial school (F OF-50)i BOE received updates from the parochial school staff during
Student’s eighth grade year. Parochial school staff observations about Student were not contrary

to BOE’S observations and experience (FOF-SO; Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2).

BOE offered Student FAPE for the 2015-16 school year.

IV. Did the Board of Education offer Student a free appropriate public education for
the 2016-17 school year?

In preparation for developing an IEP for Student for ninth grade at BOE High School,
BOE recommended academic assessments to get a present level of performance (FOF-Sl, FOF—
52, FOF-53, FOF—54).

The PPT met on June 3, 2016 to plan Student’s ninth grade IEP (F OF-55). The parochial
school Regular Education Teacher and Principal attended and shared their observations of
Student’s performance. The PPT reviewed Student’s performance and spring 2016 assessments.
The PPT determined that Student is eligible for special education under the primary disability
category of OHI-ADD/ADHD. The IEP includes academic supp01t two days in a six-day cycle
for 46 minutes; co-taught English 9; continued use of the laptop with related software; email
F ather weekly with progress updates and information on large assignments (B-35).

The IEP includes academic/cognitive and gross/ﬁne motor skills goals and objectives;
accommodations and modiﬁcations consistent with evaluation recommendations and Student’s

17

present levels of performance (FOF-SS). Services include: 3.75 hours per week Language Arts
suppoit in inclusion setting; 1.5 hours per six-day cycle of academic support in small group 01‘
individual setting; half hour per month OT in small group 01' individual setting. Accommodations
and modiﬁcations include:

0 Materials/Books/Equipment: Access to computer, assistive technology, notes when
available, supplementary Visuals, access to word processor, Bookshare'ﬁ, and colored
paper or colored overlays in all classes and settings; rubrics with assignment for
Student to use as guide.

- Tests/Quizzes/Assessments: Extended time, extra time for tests/projects/written work;
1.5 times extended time for tests/quizzes/projects/written work; responsed verbally
(adult scripting) on tests/quizzes as needed, for all classes and settings.

0 Organization: Assignment pad, chunked assignments, clear expectations/explanations
of daily events, clear work space, daily homework list, folders to hold work, graphic
organizers, list sequential steps, post routines, rubric, templates for written work;
graph paper for math work, assignment expectations available in mitten format or
electronically, assignment book reﬂected in editable electronic format, for all classes
and settings.

0 Environment: Clear work area, organized and structured classroom, preferential
seating, in all settings.

- Behavioral lnteiventions and Support: Cue expected behavior, positive reinforcement,
redirection, structure transitions, structured work plan, reinforce self—advocacy skills,
all settings.

0 Instructional Strategies: Check work in progress, clear expectations, cueing/prompts,
graphic organizers, model appropriate strategies ad skills, provide models, provide
notes/outline, Visuals t0 suppon instruction, instructional templates available on desk
or in binder to reduce eye shifts, visual and auditory prompts to support instmction, in
all settings.

- Other: Assistance organizing self/materials, maintain math notebook, prompt
notetaking in all subjects, font size 14 recommended, enlarge music sheets, individual
wider music stand to accommodate distance needs, use of dark markers on
white/smatt boards, computer font 14 unless Student chooses to decrease it,17 felt tip
marker, WYNN software loaded on his computer, simplify visual presentation of
printed materials, do not have too much on a page, all settings.

The IEP addresses Student’s Visual and executive functioning needs (Testimony of
Director of Pupil Services). Many of the accommodations help with Student’s visual issues; for
example, access to computer and WYNN software, supplementary visuals, colored paper and
overlays, extended time, preferential seating, checking work in progress, queuing prompts,
modeling, notes and outlines, Visuals to support instruction, font size 14, enlarged music sheet,
wider music stand, dark markers on white board, felt tip marker. Many of these are supports that

16 Bookshare highlights words for Student so that he can read along and hear it. It also allows him to access all prim
that teachers assign. It is a supplementaiy tool to the WYNN soﬁware which is also provided (Testimony of School
Psychologist).

17 Student sometimes did not take advantage of the suppons provided to him because he did not want to look
different from other students. He was conscious of the fact that he had a laptop and other students did not; he
preferred to have textbooks rather than enlarged papers 01' laptop so he would not stand out (Testimony of Special
Education Coordinator 1, Assistant Principal).

18

 

Student had in previous IEPs and which were shown to be successful (Testimony of School
Psychologist).

Student’s executive functioning deﬁcit is his greatest weakness. His low processing speed
may be average for other students but is low for him based on his high intellectual capacity
(Testimony of School Psychologist, Director of Pupil Services). Many of the accommodations
help with Student’s executive functioning needs; for example, graphic organizer, check work in
progress, queue/prompt during instruction, modeling, provide completed model, notes/outlines,
assist in organizing supplies, prompt for note taking (Testimony of School Psychologist).

All of the services and accommodations, which take into consideration evaluations and
recommendations, will help him because they are tailored to his needs and learning style and
because he is a bright child The IEP informs educators of Student’s ability level and how he best
learns. The parochial school staff who were present were in agreement that the IEP reﬂects
Student’s present levels of performance and his needs (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 2).

BOE’s High School Guidance Counselor will assist Student and Parents with selecting
his courses, including honors/advanced classes. Per the IEP, his services, supports, and
accommodations will apply to all classes and settings.

BOE has no concerns about Student’s ability to handle ninth grade work with the services
and supports provided by the IEP (Testimony of Special Education Coordinator 2). The PPT
believes that the spring 2016 assessments that informed the IEP were comprehensive and that
there are no other areas that need to be further explored (Testimony of Special Education
Coordinator 2). Student continues to progress which is evident by his scores. The achievement
tests get harder each year so a consistent score shows progress for his age and grade. Credible
evidence supports a ﬁnding that Student is making meaningful progress. BOE offered Student
FAPE for the 2016—17 school year.

V. If the Board of Education did not provide Student with a free appropriate public
education, is Student’s unilateral private placement appropriate?

As indicated in the above Issues One through F our, BOE provided Student with FAPE.
Therefore, it is not necessary to determine whether Student’s unilateral private placement is
appropriate.

VI. If the answer to Issue #5 is in the affirmative, are Student’s Parent’s entitled to
reimbursement for the cost of the unilateral private placement?

As indicated above in Issue Five, BOE provided Student with FAPE. Therefore, it is not
necessary to determine whether Student’s unilateral private placement is appropriate and Parents

are not entitled to reimbursement for the cost of the unilateral private placement.

VII. If the answer to Issues #1, #2, #3, and/or #4 are in the negative, what shall be the
remedy?

The answer to Issues One through Four are not in the negative and so no remedy is due.

19

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

The Board of Education provided Student with a free appropriate public education for the
2013—14 school year from the period May 10, 2014 to the end of the school year.

The Board of Education provided Student with a free appropriate public education for the
2014-15 school year.

The Board of Education provided Student with a free appropriate public education for the
2015—16 school year.

The Board of Education offered Student a free appropriate public education for the 2016—
17 school year.

Based on the determination as to Issues One through Four, it is not necessary to
determine whether Student’s unilateral private placement is appropriate.

Based on the determination as to Issues One through Five, Student’s Parents are not
entitled to reimbursement for the cost of the unilateral private placement.

Based on the determination as to Issues One through Four, no remedy is due.

20

Comment on the Conduct of the Proceedings:

An underlying current in this case was the relationship between Parents and BOE staff. Parents
and BOE staff alike were very clear in their testimony that there is a trust issue between the
parties. Father even testiﬁed that his concern was not about the IEP but about the people. Parents
clearly did not like or trust certain of the BOE ofﬁcials. BOE ofﬁcials expressed concern about
communications from Parents that were perceived as inappropriate and sometimes offensive; but
not about their advocacy on behalf of Student. There are examples in the record of BOE
implementing or changing services and accommodations as a result of Parents’ vigorous
advocacy on behalf of Student.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer’s ﬁndings and conclusions are based on the totality of the evidence, both
testimony and documentary, and not on the personality and attitude of witnesses. Credibility
determinations were made and are commented upon in the decision.

Parents committed a fair amount of their two days of hearing and some of their cross-
examination of BOE’s witnesses on what they perceived as unfair, discriminatory, illegal, and/or
otherwise inappropriate conduct on the part of BOE ofﬁcials. The non-education complaints that
Parents ﬁled against various BOE ofﬁcials with multiple agencies were not before this Hearing
Ofﬁcers Whether those complaints have merit is not relevant to this case. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
makes no ﬁndings or conclusions with regard to the circumstances surrounding other agency
complaints or allegations.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer’s ﬁndings and conclusions are focused on Student’s educational program
and whether BOE provided Student FAPE; not on What Parents believed to be the motive for
certain BOE actions 01‘ inactions.

21

1
. .v

' If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
' ,"Rrom"ding spacial education for 1115 student requiring spatial education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁcr ‘
receipt thereof, the Stat'e Board of Education shall take approprigte action to enforce the

ﬁndings or- prescription of the hcan'ng ofﬁccr.

. Appeals n‘om the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
court by either partyin acclordancc with the provisions of S action 4-183, Connecticut
Gcngral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

IgeaﬁngW Ofﬁcer Signature

CSFrN is c. .3512;qu

. Hsifzing Ofﬁcer Name 1'11 Print ‘

/

signpage. doc (bu dmk)
4/lI04'

 

