February 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0217

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Region 6 Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Elizabeth Moyse, Esq.
Law Ofﬁces of Jennifer Laviano, LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Christine Chinni, Esq.
Chinni and Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Sylvia H0, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board fail to promptly identify Student as a Student with a disability under the
IDEA?

2. Did the Board fail to evaluate student in all suspected areas of disabilities?

Did the Board fail to provide FAPE for the two years prior to the ﬁling of the Due

process complaint?

Did the Board fail to provide necessary accommodations?

If the Board failed to provide F APE, is Marvelwood School appropriate?

Should the Board be required to outplace Student at Marvelwood?

Should the Board be required to reimburse Parents for their payment of an independent

educational evaluation?

8. Do the circumstances warrant an award of compensatmy education?

5-”

sewe

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on October 27, 2015. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on October 29, 2015 and conducted a Prehearing Conference on
November 18, 2015. At the prehearing conference, the parties requested an extension of the
mailing date of the Final Decision so that they could engage in voluntary mediation. The hearing
was scheduled for February 4, 2016 and the mailing date of the Final Decision was extended to
February 8, 2016. On February 1, 2016, the Parent’s attorney repelted to the Hearing Ofﬁcer
that the parties had settled their dispute and that the Parent was withdrawing the Due Process
Complaint with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AN D ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school distn'ct responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropn'ate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Wm

He’ariné/Ofﬁwr Signature

S 'lvia Ho
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

