December 23, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0178

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

East Lyme Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on beha1f of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Frederick L. Dorsey
Kainen, Escalel'a and McHale, PCT
21 Oak Street
Hartford, CT 06106

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

Should the Board be allowed to perform a neuropsychological evaluation of the Student without
parental consent?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate
public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement
Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parent refused to sign a consent form
allowing the Board to conduct a neuropsychological evaluation of the Student. The Board ﬁ1ed
for due process. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on October 8, 2015 and a pre-
heaIing conference was held on October 14, 2015. A hearing date of December 4, 2015 was
chosen by the parties. The parties agreed to a resolution session which occurred on November 3,
2015. In an electronic transmission, the Board advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter had
been resolved and withdrew the due process request.

The date for the mailing the Final Decision and Order was extended to December 24, 2015 to
accommodate the hearing dates.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisi0ns of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc 010 disk)
4/1/04

 

