April 14, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0389

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Vernon Board of Education V. StudentI

Appearing on behalf of Board of Education: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing on behalf of Student: Surrogate Parent

Appearing before: Janis C. J el'man
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by the Board of
Education (“BOE”) Via Letter dated March 3, 2016.2 It was received by Student’s Surrogate
Parent on March 3. The original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was April 17. A
telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on March 15. J ohn Durham, Surrogate Parent,
appeared on behalf of Student. No one appeared on behalf of BOE.

Issues:
1. Were the Board of Education’s reading, behavior, and occupational therapy
evaluations of Student appropriate?
2. If the answer to Issue One is in the negative, is Student’s Parent entitled to an
independent educational evaluation?

During the pi'e-hearing conference, Surrogate Parent requested an extension of the deadline to
mail the ﬁnal decision and order to give the parties time to participate in mediation3 prior to
preparing for hearing. After fully considering the request, it was granted and the deadline to mail
the ﬁnal decision and order was extended 30 days until May 171

The parties participated in mediation on April 11. Via email dated April 12, BOE’s Attorney
indicated that the parties entered into a written agreement at the conclusion of mediation and that
BOE withdraws its hearing request regarding prior evaluations.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed.

l In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U{S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student” and
“Student’s Mother” in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2016 unless otherwise indicated

3 Surrogate Parent ﬁled for mediation to resolve the issues in this case and other issues not cun‘ently the subject of a
due process request.

 

1 ' ,

Ifthe local 01' regional board of educanon or the uniﬁed school dishict rcsmnsible nor

p'_1'ov1'd1'ng spacial education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the: ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days aﬁcr
receipt thereof, the Stat'e Board of Bchath shall take appropriate action to cnforce the

ﬁndings or- prescriptiog ofthe hearing ofﬁcer.

4 Appeals from the hearing dec1sion ofthc hearing ofﬁcer may bemade to stats 01' federal
court by either party in accprdancc with the provisicins of Scotion 4-183, Connecticut
Gcngral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs‘Codc 1415(1)(2)(A)..

 

1:161:11; atiug Ofﬁcer S1guatu1'e

G&Nts QQE—izmjﬁq

. Heéring Ofﬁcsr Name 1'11 Print .

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/01,

 

