April 22, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16~0367

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

East Hartford Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Linda Yoder, Esq.
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Haltford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Was the Board’s evaluation appropriate?
2. If not, is Parent entitled to an independent education evaluation at public expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Board brought the Due Process Complaint and Hearing Request on February 18,
2016. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on February 24, 2016, The Hearing Ofﬁcer
conducted a Prehearing Conference on March 10, 2016. The hearing was scheduled for
April 22, 2016. The parties jointly requested that the mailing date be extended so that
they could engage in mediation with a state appointed mediator. On April 18, 2016, the
Board’s attorney informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that Board was withdrawing its Due
Process Complaint and Request for Hearing because the Parents had notiﬁed the Board
that they were withdrawing their request for an independent educational evaluation.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after“
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals ﬁ'om the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

com“: by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A){

, AMW/w

Hearing’bfﬁcer Signature

Sylvia Ho
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04 '

 

