July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0220

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v, Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Meredith Braxton
Meredith C. Braxton, LLC
280 Railroad Avenue, Suite 205
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Abby R. Wadler
Assistant Town Attorney
Ofﬁce of the Town Attorney
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06883

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education violate its Child Find obligation before J anuary 27‘, 2014?
(a) If so, is the Student entitled to compensatory education, including reimbursement for
evaluations secured at her own expense, except relating to the period of time that the Student was
in the jurisdiction of the Easton Board of Education?

2. Did the Board of Education provide the Student 21 free appropriate public education after
January 27, 2014?

(a) If not, were the Student’s unilateral placements at Greenbrier Academy and Trails
Carolina appropriate?

(b) If they were appropriate, is the Student entitled to reimbursement for the expense of
those placements, including transportation?

(0) If they were not appropriate, is the Student entitled to compensatory education?

3. Did the Board of Education violate the Student’s rights under Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act?
(a) If so, is the Student entitled to compensatory education?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter on
October 28, 2015. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on October 29,

1 The Memorandum And Orders in this case included a typographical error that identiﬁed this
date as January 29, 2014. The correct date is January 27, 2014.

 

July 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16-0220

2015. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was conducted on November 10, 2015. Attorney
Abby Wadler appeared on behalf of the Board of Education (“Board”) and Attorney Meredith
Braxton appeared on behalf of the Student. It was determined that the initial deadline for ﬁling
the Final Decision and Order was January 11, 2016.

On November 10, 2015, the Student submitted a written request for a thirty—day postponement
and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in this case to
February 10, 2016. The Board consented to the requested postponement and it was granted.
Subsequently, the Student and/or the Board requested further postponements and extensions of
the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision, which were also granted. A
ﬁnal deadline for ﬁling the ﬁnal decision was established to be July 29, 2016. On J anuary 11,
2016, the Student submitted a motion to allow telephonic testimony in this matter. The Board of
Education timely objected to the motion and it was denied on January 17, 2016.

Evidentiary hearings were conducted on January 4, 2016, January 17, 2016, F ebruary 2, 2016,
April 1, 2016, April 11, 2016, May 9, 2016 and May 25, 2016. The following witnesses
testiﬁed:

Student’s Father

Student’s Mother

Brigid Barry, School Administrator
Helen Blackburn, School Psychologist
Lorraine Termini, School Administrator
Luis Rivera, Guidance Counselor
Lindsey Pontieri, Teacher

Kathy Mulaire, Evaluator

Krystina Dawson, Evaluator

Kristen Mulheam, Social Worker
Kevin Frick, Therapist

John Samanich, Psychiatrist

Joseph Braccio, Psychotherapist

Claude Schleuderer, Evaluator

Sharon Turshon, Retired School Administrator

Hearing Ofﬁcer Exhibits HO 1 through HO 4 were entered as full exhibits. Student Exhibits P 1
through P 12, P 14 through P 18, P 20 through P 22, P 24 through P 28, P 30 through P 51, P 53
through 62, P 64 through P 79, and P 81 through P 97 were entered as full exhibits. Finally,
Board Exhibits B 1 through B 69 were entered as full exhibits.

All motions and objections not previously ruled upon, if any, are hereby overruled.

To the extent that the procedural history, summary, and ﬁndings of fact actually represent
conclusions of law, they should be so considered, and vice versa. Bonnie Am F. v. Calallen
Independent School District, 835 F.Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993); SAS Institute Inc. v. H
Computer Systems, Inc, 605 F.Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985).

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

SUMMARY:

The Student, with signiﬁcant attention, learning and emotional disabilities entered the Board’s
high school as a mainstream student but quickly displayed attendance, behavior and academic
difﬁculties. Her parents placed her in a private school for a time, but returned her to the Board’s
high school in the fall of the next school year. A referral for special education and related
services was made, evaluations were completed and an individualized education program was
provided in the Board’s alternative high school. The Student’s parents uni1ate1‘a11y placed her in
a therapeutic boarding school and a wilderness program.

The Student claimed that the Board failed to timely fulﬁll its Child Find obligation and then
failed to provide a free appropriate public education. The Student’s request for reimbursement
of the expense of the unilateral placements is granted.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (“C.G.S.”)
Section 10—76h and related regulations, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(“IDEA”), 20 United States Code (“U.S.C.”) Sections 1400 et seq, and related reguIations, and
in accordance with the Unifoxm Administrative Procedure Act (“U.A.P.A.”), C.G.S. Sections 4-
176e to 4-178 inclusive, Section 4-181a and Section 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After considering all the evidence submitted by the parties, including documentary evidence and
the testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. The Student was born on July 10, 1998, and is now 18 years of age. She attended public
elementary and middle schools in Easton, Connecticut where she lived with her mother after her
parents’ divorce. (Testimony of Father (“Father”))

2. The Student has been diagnosed with Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactive Disorder inattentive
type, Maj 01' Depressive Disorder, Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder, Mathematics Learning
Disability, Learning Disorder (executive function difﬁculties, slow processing speed, impaired
memory retrieval), Nonverbal Learning Disability, Bipolar Disorder, Parent-Child Relational
Problems, and Adjustment Disorder, among others. (Exhibits P 2, P 88 and Exhibits B 12A, B
15,B16,B17, B 33)

3. The Student was ﬁrst identiﬁed as eligible to receive special education and related
services during her fourth grade year in Easton under the identiﬁcation category of Speciﬁc
Learning Disability due to weak reading comprehension and slow processing speed. She
received special education services in mainstream schools, with goals in reading and
mathematics, until the seventh grade when she began refusing services. (Exhibit B 14; Mother)
At that point, the Easton Public Schools and her parents decided to substitute a signiﬁcantly less
intensive educational program under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (29 U.S.C. Section
794) (“504 Plan”) for her special education program. (Exhibits P 20 and 24; Mother)

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

4. The Student and her older sister moved to Greenwich to live with their father after the
Student’s seventh grade year. She then attended Greenwich Public Schools’ Central Middle
School for the eighth grade with only the support of her 504 Plan. She did relatively well that
school year. (Father, Mother)

5. The Student entered Greenwich High School (“GHS”) in the fall of 2012 for her ninth
grade year. She did not meet with success at GHS. She frequently skipped classes, misbehaved
and did very poorly academically. (Father; Mother; Exhibit B 38; Exhibits P 27, P 28, P 30, P 31
and P 32) The GHS team added supports, including the “Stars” program and security escorts to
her classes and recommended that her father ﬁle a F amily with Service Needs petition with the
juvenile court system. These interventions were not effective. (F ather; Mother; Barry)

6. The Student’s parents moved her from GHS to the private Hyde School in Woodstock CT
in early January 2013. The Student similarly did not find success at the Hyde School. (Father,
Mother)

7. In the meantime, GHS staff convened a Planning and Placement Team (“PPT”) meeting
on January 9, 2013 to address a referral for possible special education eligibility. The PPT
decided to secure a psycho—educational evaluation comprised of a basic academic battery,
psychologica1testing, a social history and a diagnostic reading test. The Student’s parents did
not attend this meeting because they had already removed the Student to the Hyde School. The
proposed evaluation was not conducted. (Exhibit B 9; F ather; Mother)

8. The Hyde School recommended that the Student attend a wilderness program for the
summer of 2013. As a result, the Student was enrolled in the Adirondack Leadership Expedition
(“ALE”). (Father; Mother)

9. While at ALE, the Student was evaluated by Dr. Claude Schleudererz, a highly qualiﬁed
psychologist and former educator who has performed hundreds of evaluations. Dr. Schleuderer
produced a comprehensive report of his June 2013 evaluation of the Student’s cognitive,
academic and emotional proﬁle. (Exhibits P 96 and B 16)

10. Dr. Schleuderer administered tests of the Student’s cognitive, achievement and emotional
functioning. He reported a full scale IQ for the Student of 94, within the average range. The
Student’s processing speed was notably at the bottom of the Borderline range due to her great
difﬁculty in Visual attention, visual seaming and visual focus. (Exhibit B 16; Schleuderer)

11. Dr. Schleuderer also found that the Student exhibits a very signiﬁcant attention problem,
wan‘anting a diagnosis of Attention Deﬁcit Disorder (“ADD” 01' “ADHD”). (Exhibit B 16;
Schleuderer)

12. On academic achievement tests, the Student’s math ﬂuency placed her in the lowest .5%
of her peers. The Student’s weakness in math ﬂuency and lack of automaticity for math facts,
Dr. Schleuderer concluded, is due to a previously unrecognized mathematics learning disability.
Like many students with ADD and learning disabilities, D1”. Schleuderer observed, the Student
frequently misbehaves in school. Her oppositional behavior and noncompliance with behavior

2 Dr. Schleuderer also provided credible testimony at the hearing of this case.

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

demands are closely related to her ADD and learning disabilities: “Because the academic
difﬁculties make them feel ‘dumb’ they develop a strategy of acting provocatively in order to
attribute their school difﬁculties to behavior, preferring that to labeling of themselves as being
incapable.” (Exhibit B 16; Schleuderer)

13. Dr. Schleuderer observed that although the Student is at risk for substance abuse
problems in the future, she was not a substance abuser at the time of his evaluation. (Exhibit B
16; Schleuderer)

14. In summary, Dr. Schleuderer found that the Student suffers from Oppositional Deﬁant
Disorder, ADD predominately inattentive type, Parent-Child Relational Problems and 3.
Mathematics Disorder. He indicated that the Student did not need support for language-based
writing tasks, but did require a considerable amount of help in basic mathematical operations.
The Student’s complex proﬁle means that instruction must be nuanced. Due to the Student’s
ADD for instance, the window for instruction in basic mathematics is veiy narrow. Because she
cannot maintain attention in the low interest subj ects of addition, subtraction and multiplication,
instruction will require great care. Instruction in higher interest topics such as language arts, will
require different techniques. Accordingly, use of the same strategies for all subject areas, he
concluded, would be useless for this complex Student. (Exhibit B 16; Schleuderer)

15. Dr. Schleuderer strongly recommended that the Student be placed in a therapeutic

boarding school. As he explained,
She needs a considerable amount of external behavioral controls in an
environment that will take into account her emotional needs and integrate her
academic production, emotional growth and psychotherapeutic interventions.
Such integrated treatment is only possible in an environment where the treatment
team consists of and integrates her academic growth, social interactions and the
residential elements of her daily life. Her emotional difﬁculties are, at this point,
so signiﬁcant that such a combined approach is necessary.

(Exhibit B 16 p. 18)

16. ALE provided a Discharge Summary at the end of the Student’s stay. The Discharge
Summary noted that the Student suffers from poor self esteem, poor insight into her own
behavior and poor accountability for her behavior. Her “underlying emotional difﬁculties are
inhibiting [the Student’s] ability to achieve her academic potential. Addressing these emotional
difﬁculties will be a necessary precursor to [the Student] achieving her potential in the
classroom.” ALE noted the following diagnoses: Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder, ADHD,
Parent-Child Relational Problems and Mathematics Disorder. (Exhibit B 33)

17. The Student’s parents also secured an evaluation of her cognitive and academic status
from North Star Educational Services (“North Star”) in August 2013. (Exhibits B 14 and B 15)

18. Nmth Star’s cognitive assessment revealed that the Student suffers from a nonverbal
learning disability that impacts not only her learning, but also her executive functioning,
behavior regulation and social interactions. She has signiﬁcant challenges in the areas of Visual
perception and visual discrimination. Her visual memory is somewhat less impaired, falling into
the low average range. Her low Visual-motor processing speed score reﬂects deﬁcits in her

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0220
ability to visually organize and Visually scan information. (Exhibit B 15)

19. Nmth Star’s academic evaluation echoed Dr. Schleuderer’s ﬁnding of Very low
achievement in the area of math ﬂuency, as well as extremely poor multiplication and division
skills. The Student’s written composition score was well below grade level. (Exhibit B 14)

20. North Star’s Pam Flynn wrote that the Student’s “longstanding learning disability” has
been misunderstood throughout her schooling, resulting in inappropriate instruction and
signiﬁcantly undermining her academic conﬁdence. The Student’s emotional issues, Flynn
concluded, stem largely from the failure to identify and address her nonverbal learning disability.
(Exhibit B 14, p. 7).

21. The Student was enrolled at a private boarding school for students with learning
disabilities, the Malvelwood School, at the start of the 2013/2014 School year. She was soon
dismissed from Marvelwood School for incidents involving alcohol and a physical ﬁght with a
classmate. (Father; Mother)

22. After Marvelwood, the Student’s parents re-enrolled her at GHS in October 2013. Before
placing the Student in a classroom, GHS convened a PPT meeting on November 1, 2013 to
address a referral for special education and related sewices. (Exhibit B 8)

23. At the November 1, 2013 PPT meeting, the team reviewed the North Star repoits and the
ALE Discharge Summary, which were provided earlier by the Student’s parents.3 Pam F lynn
from North Star also attended the meeting by telephone. The PPT did not yet have the
Schleudei'er report4, but a copy was provided at the meeting. Although it did not express
disagreement with the ALE Discharge Summary, the North Star evaluations 01' the Schleuderer
report, the PPT declined to make a decision about the Student’s eligibility for special education
and related services at the meeting. Nor did the PPT request any additional testing or
assessments at that time. Instead, the PPT decided to adjourn to review the Schleuderer report.
(Exhibit B 8)

24. At the same time and although it did not make an eligibility decision, the PPT placed the
Student at the Board’s alternate high school known then as the ARCH Program. ARCH was a
small program housed apart from the much larger GHS. It was the Board’s most restrictive
setting and was populated primarily with students identiﬁed as requiring special education
services. (F ather; Mother; Rivera; Exhibit B 8; Paities’ Stipulation of Fact)

25. The ARCH program was not a therapeutic program but did have a dedicated social
worker and guidance counselor on site to suppmt the students. All academic subjects were
taught by special education teachers and the curriculum was modiﬁed. Class sizes were small

3 Throughout the process, the Student’s parents provided the Board with copies of all the reports
and documents they had about the Student and signed all consents for evaluation and all releases
for conﬁdential records that were requested of them. (Father; Mother)

4 The Schleuderer report had not been provided to the PPT before the meeting as the result of a
miscommunication between the Student’s mother and father. It was not withheld in an effort to
mislead the PPT. (Mother)

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0220

and the school offered a relatively high level of structure. (Rivera)

26. Although the Student did not have an individualized education plan (“IEP”) at ARCH,
she did receive counseling with the school social worker for 30 minutes each week and group
therapy for 45 minutes each week. She also had a period of daily resource room support with a
special education teacher each day. The resource room support typically consisted of reviewing
lessons and breaking down assignments from the academic classes. (Rivera; Mulhearn; Pontieri)

27. The PPT did not meet again to review the Schleuderer report until ﬁve weeks later, on
December 9, 2013. Again, Pam Flynn from North Star attended the meeting by telephone. A
letter from the Student’s psychiatrist, Dr. Samanich, was also provided. (Exhibit B 9) 1n the
letter, Dr. Samanich identiﬁed the Student’s diagnoses as Maj or Depressive Disorder,
Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder, ADHD inattentive subtype and Nonverbal Learning Disability.
Dr. Samanich credibly testiﬁed that the Student was anxious all of the time at school and could
barely function in or out of school. He believed that when she used alcohol, it was to soothe her
anxiety so that she could get through the day. Dr. Samanich also strongly recommended
placement in a therapeutic boarding school as necessary to meet the Student’s academic needs.
(Samanich; Exhibit B 12A)

28. Again, and despite the Student’s parents’ request that it do so, the PPT declined to
identify the Student as eligible for special education and related services at the December 9, 2013
PPT meeting. Instead, the PPT requested another evaluation of the Student, to include: a)
classroom obsewation by the school psychologist; b) social and behavioral rating scales; 0)
academic battery; 01) clinical interview, e) teacher feedback; and f) cognitive testing by the
school psychologist, including the NEPSY 115. (Exhibit B 9)

29. The evaluation requested by the PPT was performed by Board staff between December
10, 2013 and December 19, 2013. The Board’s psychologist administered the NEPSY II, which
produced scores in the expected range for Comprehension of Instruction, Memory for Faces and
Affect Recognition. The Student’s NEPSY 11 scores for Theory of Mind, by contrast, were in
the Borderline range. Theory of Mind looks at how emotion relates to social context and a
person’s ability to interpret the affect of others in a social context. (Exhibit B 12)

30. The Student’s parents’ responses on social and behavior rating scales put the Student in
the Clinically Signiﬁcant range for Externalizing Problems, the At Risk range for Depression and
the Clinically Signiﬁcant range on the Behavior Symptoms Index for Atypicality, Withdrawal
and Attention Problems. (Exhibit B 12)

31. The Student’s social skills were almost all Below Average on the Social Skills
merovement System, including weaknesses in Communication, Cooperation, Responsibility,
Empathy, Engagement and Self Control. (Exhibit B 12)

32. The Board of Education’s testing of the Student’s academic achievement produced below
average scores for Essay Composition and Numerical Operations. The evaluator wrote: “[Her]
math facts are not automatic and she could not remember routines or procedures for multi-digit

5 The NEPSY II is a test of neuropsychological development and cognitive function. (Exhibit B
l 2)
7

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0220
multiplication and division.” (Exhibit B 12 p. 19)

33. The PPT did not meet again until J anuary 27, 2014, six weeks later. At that point, the
PPT decided that the Student was eligible for special education and related services under the
category of Emotional Disturbance (“ED”). (Exhibit B 6)

34. The PPT placed the Student in the ARCH program with the same services and supports
that had been provided before she was identiﬁed as eligible for special education and related
services. (Exhibit B 6; Rivera; Mulaire)

35. The Student’s January 27, 2014 IEP identiﬁed her then present levels of performance as
follows:
Language Arts: Reading Comprehension SS 98, Ora1 Reading Accuracy SS 100, Word
Reading SS 106, Basic Reading Composite SS 105, Essay Composition SS 92.
Mathematics: Age Appropriate
Behavior/Social: Passing all classes, seeks out mental health supports, pa1ticipates
in group
Other: Working Memory 102, Comprehension 99, Perceptual Reasoning 108,
Processing Speed 70
(Exhibit B 6)

36. Notably, because the Student’s level of performance in Mathematics was identiﬁed as
“Age Appropriate” the IEP did not include any services 01‘ other provision to address her lack of
automaticity in math facts or her failure to understand and perform basic math functions like
multiplication and division. (Exhibit B 6) Yet, the Board’s staff admitted that these are skills
possessed by most elementary level students, and that it is not “Age Appropriate” for a high
school student to lack them. (Mulaire)

37. The January 27, 2014 IEP included one Academic goal in Writing, three Social/Behavior
goals for Counseling, one goal in Employment, one goal in Post High School Education and one
goal in School Skills. There was no provision to address the Student’s nonverba1learning
disorder, mathematics disorder or signiﬁcant ADD. (Exhibit B 6)

38. Although the Student’s academic work at ARCH was reported to be acceptable in the
IEP, she was actually failing several classes and continuing to leave school without permission.
She earned only one high school credit for the semester and got into a ﬁght and used alcohol at
school despite ARCH’S high level of structure and supervision. (Exhibit B 7; Exhibit P 64;
Mother)

39. The Student’s parents disagreed with the ARCH placement and notiﬁed the Board of
their decision to unilaterally place the student in a private school. (Exhibit B 7; Mother)

40. The Student’s parents enrolled her at Greenbrier Academy (“Greenbrier”) in West
Virginia on February 3, 2014. (Exhibit P 90; Mother)

41. Greenbrier is a therapeutic boarding school for girls aged 13 to 18. It is licensed and
accredited by the Nolth Central Association of College and Schools and the West Virginia
Department of Health and Human Resources. Greenbrier has eight certiﬁed teachers, one

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

certiﬁed special education teacher, eight licensed therapists and approximately thirty resident
advisors who are trained in the school’s therapeutic model. Class size is an average of nine
students. (Exhibit P 84; Frick)

42. Greenbrier caters to students who exhibit a variety of emotional problems, including
anxiety, depression, and substance abuse. It offers a therapeutic milieu that meets its students’
therapeutic needs in all phases of the program, from academic to therapeutic to residential. This
therapeutic milieu provides the framework by which the program enforces consistent support and
evaluation of students’ behavioral, emotional and academic needs in all phases of their lives.
(Exhibit P 84; Frick)

43. Greenbrier calls its academic approach Quantum Learning, which attempts to connect
the learning experience to real life. In so doing, it uses a multimodal, experiential approach with
many hands on activities, kinesthetic and Visual aids. The Student participated in academic
subjects ranging from Biology, Chemistry and Geometiy to English, American Studies,
Drumming and Physical Education and earned passing grades in most of her classes. (Exhibit B
84; Prick).

44. The Student also participated in intensive therapy, with 60 to 90 minutes of individual
therapy each day and an additional four group therapy sessions each weak. Family therapy was
conducted each week over the telephone. The Student’s therapist worked on addressing her
focus and attention to school work, regulating emotions, tolerating stress, developing and
maintaining relationships and improving self esteem. (Exhibit B 84; Frick)

45. After several months at Greenbrier, the Student was involved in two behavior incidents
that prompted Greenbrier to recommend that she participate in another wilderness program. In
July 2014, the Student and a few other girls eloped from the Greenbrier campus and caught a ride
into a nearby town. They were returned to the school after about ﬁve or six hours. In another
incident, the Student was involved in a physical altercation with a classmate. (Exhibit B 84;
Frick; Mother)

46. Accordingly, the Student was enrolled in the Trails North Carolina boarding wilderness
program (“Trails”) from July 11, 2014 to October 8, 2014. Trails imbeds an academic
component to its therapeutic wilderness program. Students spend one week a month in base
camp, where they attend academic classes. Another week is spent at a second base camp where
they take day hikes but also paiticipate in science laboratory. The ﬁnal two weeks per month are
spent on expedition, where students are still required to journal and read assigned texts. During
the Student’s time at Trails, she not only received intensive therapeutic interventions, but also
earned three high school credits for her academic work. (Exhibit P 89; Mother)

47. The Student also progressed in social competence, communication and gained an
increased sense of agency at Trails. The Trails’ Discharge Summary recommended that the
Student return to Greenbrier due to her continuing and signiﬁcant emotional and learning needs.
(Exhibit P 89)

48. The Student returned to Greenbrier on about October 10, 2014, where she resumed her
prior program. (Frick; Mother)

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

49. The Student made slow progress in her therapeutic treatment and in academics over the
course of her matriculation at Greenbrier. She became more engaged in class, more determined
to complete schoolwork and better able to make and maintain friendships. She also made
academic progress at Greenbrier, earning three high school credits with good grades. (Exhibit P
84; Mother)

50. On J anuary 15, 2015 against Greenbrier’s advice6 the Student returned to her mother’s
home in Easton. There, she was enrolled in the Easton Public Schools. At about this time, the
Student’s new psychiatrist diagnosed her with bipolar disorder and implemented a
pharmaceutical intervention that has had a signiﬁcant impact in improving her emotional and
academic function. (Mother; Braccio) The Easton Public Schools placed her at Wellspring
residential treatment center in Bethlehem, Connecticut where she remains today. (Mother;
Exhibit P 95)

51. Wellspring residential treatment center is even more highly structured and supervised
than Greenbrier. As her Wellspring therapist testiﬁed, the Student’s emotional and learning
needs continue to be so pervasive that she requires the highly stmctured and integrated setting of
a therapeutic treatment center to receive an education. It is likely that she has required such a
setting in order to be educated since she was thiiteen years of age. (Braccio)

52. The evidence as a whole demonstrated that due to the Student’s complex and closely
intertwined leaming and emotional disabilities, it has been necessary that she be educated in a
therapeutic boarding school or residential treatment center in order to access her education
during the time relevant to this case. (Samanich; Prick; Schleuderer; Braccio; Exhibits B 12A, B
16, B 33 and P 69 and P 85)

53. Greenbrier was an appropriate placement for the Student because it offered an intensive
therapeutic milieu that crossed the school, residential and therapeutic phases of the Student’s day
as well as an integrated academic program that was reasonably expected to afford the Student
educational beneﬁt, including an opportunity to earn high school credits Although Greenbrier
was a very restrictive setting, its restrictiveness was appropriate to the Student’s needs. (Prick;
Mother; Exhibit P 84)

54. The Trails program, although less focused on academics than Greenbrier, was also an
appropriate placement for the Student at the time. At Trails, the Student spent ﬁve days out of
every month in a classroom setting and was required to journal and read assigned books even
while out on expedition. She had the opportunity to, and did, earn three high school credits
during her time there. Trails’ intensive therapeutic program was also reasonably expected to
beneﬁt the Student from a behavior regulation and emotional point of View, which in turn,
improved her readiness to focus on academics. (Frick; Mother; Exhibit P 89)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1. In Board ofEducation v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176 (1982)(“Rowley”), the United States
Supreme Couit set out a two—part test for determining whether a local board of education has

6 Greenbrier recommended that the Student continue her education in a residential boarding

school like Greenbrier or a residential treatment center. (Exhibit P 85)
10

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

offered a student a free appropriate public education (“FAPE”) in compliance with the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. Sections 1400 et seq (“IDEA”). The ﬁrst
part is whether there has been compliance with the procedural requirements of IDEA; and the
second part is whether the student’s IEP is reasonably calculated to enable the student to receive
educational beneﬁts. Id. at 206—207.

2. The Board had the burden in this case to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that
its IEP was appropriate and in compliance with IDEA’s requirements. Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies (“R.S.C.A.”) Section 10-76h—14(a).

3. The ﬁrst prong 0f the Rowley inquiry, whether the Board complied with IDEA’S
procedural mandates, is critical. As the Supreme Court said in Rowley, Congress based IDEA on
the “conviction that adequate compliance with the procedures prescribed would in most cases
assure much if not all of what Congress wished in the way of substantive content in an IEP."
Rowley at 206.

4. The procedural requirements of IDEA are designed to guarantee that the education of
each student with a disability is individually tailored to meet the student‘s unique needs and
abilities and to safeguard against arbitrary or erroneous decision—making. 20 U.S.C. Sections
1412(1) and 1415(a)-(e); Daniel RR. v. State Board ofEducation, 874 F.2d 1036, 1039, and
1041 (5th Cir. 1989). Signiﬁcantly, compliance with IDEA's procedural requirements is the
responsibility of the board of education, and not the parents. Uniﬁed School District No. 1 v.
Department ofEducafion, 64 Conn. App. 273, 285 (2001).

5. While a student is entitled to both the procedural and substantive protections of the
IDEA, not every procedural Violation is sufﬁcient to support a ﬁnding that a student was denied
FAPE. Mere technical Violations will not render an IEP invalid. Amanda .I v. Clark County
School District, 267 F.3d 877, 892 (9th Cir. 2001). 1n matters alleging a procedural violation a
due process hearing ofﬁcer may ﬁnd that a student did not receive a FAPE only if the procedural
Violation did one of the following: (1) impeded the child's right to a FAPE; (2) signiﬁcantly
impeded the parent‘s opportunity to participate in the decision-making process; or (3) caused a
deprivation of educational beneﬁts. 34 C.F.R. Section 300.513(a)(2); L.M v. Capistrano Unified
School District, 556 F.3d 900, 909 (9th Cir. 2008).

6. One of the most fundamental procedural requirements of IDEA is Child Find. Child F ind
describes a public school district’s afﬁrmative and ongoing duty to locate, identify and evaluate
students within its jurisdiction who have a disability. 20 U.S.C. Sections 1401(3) and
1412(a)(3); 34 C.F.R. Section 300.111; R.C.S.A. Sections 10—76d-6 through 10-76d-9). The
school district must accept and process referrals from school staff, parents, physicians, social
workers and clinics for the initial evaluation of a child suspected of having a disability. R.C.S.A
Section 10—76d—7.

7. The school district must then promptly conduct an initial evaluation of the student and
convene a PPT meeting to determine whether the student has a qualifying disability. R.C.S.A.
Sections 10-76d-9 and 10-76d—10. A cornerstone of Child Find is that students must be assessed
"in all areas of suspected disability" so as to garner the information necessary to identify the
student’s educational needs and to develop his or her educational program. 20 U.S.C. Section
14l4(b)(3); 34 CPR. Section 300.304(c)(4). In this regard, school districts must "use a variety
1 1

 

July 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16-0220

of assessment tools and strategies to gather relevant functional, developmental, and academic
information“ about the student. 34 C.F.R. Section 300.304.

8. If a student is determined to have a disability and is eligible for special education and
related services, the PPT must develop an IEP for the student. IDEA sets forth a process by
which each student’s IEP is to be developed and what it must contain. The IEP is the "key
operative feature of the F ederal Act.“ David D. v. Dartmouth School Committee, 775 F.2d 411,
415 (lst Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1140 (1986).

9. Each IEP must include a statement of the student's present level of performance in each
area of disability, a statement of measurable annual goals, including academic and functional
goals, that are designed to meet each of the child's educational needs resulting from the
disability, and a statement of the special education and related services to be provided in order to
enable the child to attain the goals and progress in the general education curriculum. 20 U.S.C.
Section 1414(d)(1)(A); 34 C.F.R. Section 300.320.

10. If a student is identiﬁed as eligible for special education and related services, the board
must implement an IEP for the student within fmty-ﬁve school days of the referral for possible
eligibility, exclusive of the time required to obtain parental consent. R.C.S.A. Section 10-76d»
13(a). See also 34 CPR. Section 300.301(c) (absent state imposed timeline evaluation must be
implemented within sixty days of parental consent)

11. The sufﬁciency of an IEP under IDEA is assessed in light of information available at the
time the IEP is developed; it is not judged in hindsight. Adams v. Oregon, 195 F.3d 1141, 1149
(9th Cir. 1999). "An IEP is a snapshot, not a retrospective." F uhrmmm v, East Hanover Board
ofEducation, 993 F.2d 1031, 1036 (3rd Cir. 1993). It must be Viewed in terms of what was
objectively reasonable when the IEP was developed. Id.

12. The Student here claims that the PPT had sufﬁcient information to identify her as eligible
for special education and related sewices at the meeting on November 1, 2013 and should have
made her eligible at that time. While it is true that the PPT had ample evidence to conclude that
the Student suffered from one or more qualifying disabilities (ADHD, signiﬁcant emotional and
behavioral deﬁcits and speciﬁc learning disabilities) on November 1, 2013, the PPT’s desire to
defer the eligibility decision until it could study the Schleuderer was reasonable and appropriate.
The PPT, after all, was required to not only identify the Student as eligible for special education
and related services, but also to develop an appropriate IEP for her. An understanding of the
Schleuderer report was crucial to this latter task.

13. It was not appropriate or reasonable, however, that the PPT took ﬁve weeks to review
the Sehleuderer report before it reconvened. Similarly, while it was also appropriate and
reasonable for the PPT to want an evaluation performed by Board staff, it was not appropriate or
reasonable that the PPT waited until December 9, 2013 to request that evaluation. The Board
evaluation could and should have been planned at the November 1, 2013 meeting.

14. Furtheimore, even though the Board’s evaluation was performed promptly after it was
requested in December 2013, the PPT did not meet again to review that evaluation and make the
eligibility decision until January 27, 2014. The entire process could and should have been
completed weeks earlier, certainly by the week of J anuary 6, 2014. This would have placed the
12

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0220

Board within the forty-ﬁve day timeline established by R.C.S.A. Section 10-76d—13(a).

15. The Board’s procedural violation in failing to timely complete the Child Find process
impeded the Student’s right to a free appropriate public education and deprived her of
educational beneﬁt for approximately three weeks. Even though the program implemented after
J anuary 27, 2016 did not constitute a free appropriate public education, the Board’s delay caused
the Student’s parents to delay placing her at Greenbrier, where she ultimately did receive an
appropriate program, for approximately three weeks.

16. The IEP offered by the Board on J anuary 27, 2014 also signiﬁcantly misstated the
Student’s educational needs. When an IEP is premised on a misunderstanding of important
aspects of the Student’s disability, it can hardly provide FAPE. Indeed, a school district’s
inaccurate description of a student’s actual levels of performance in the IEP has been speciﬁcally
recognized as a material procedural violation of IDEA. 20 U.S.C. Section 1414(d)(1)(A); 34
CPR. Section 3001320; RR v. Wallingford Board ofEducafion, 101 L.R.P. 196 (D. Conn 2001);
Newtown Public Schools, 107 L.R.P. 59412 (Ct SEA 2007).

17. The IEP offered to the Student on January 27, 2014 inaccurately represented her then
present level of performance in the area of Mathematics as “Age Appropriate.” lt neglected to
identify the Student’s lack of automaticity in math facts and her failure to understand
multiplication and division. These, the Board’s staff admitted, are skills possessed by most
elementary level students, and it is not age appropriate for a high school student to lack them.

18. The misstatement of the Student’s present level of performance in Mathematics resulted
in the absence of any goals 01' objectives or services related to mathematics in her IEP.
Consequently, this procedural Violation also impeded the Student’s right to a free appropriate
public education and deprived her of educational beneﬁt.

19. Similarly, although the IEP acknowledges and addresses the Student’s emotional
disability, it ignored her signiﬁcant attention deﬁcits and nonverbal learning disabilities. The
IEP neither mentions these problems as impacting her learning nor includes any services or goals
in these impoitant areas.

20. Finally, the Board’s IEP is deﬁcient because it does not offer the Student a residential
placement. As each of the Student’s mental health providers testiﬁed and the evidence as a
whole demonstrated, the Student requires a residential placement with a therapeutic milieu
spanning all waking hours in order to beneﬁt from her education. Only in a residential context
can a program integrate the level of consistency, structure and therapeutic support that Student
needs to learn in light of her complex and intertwined disability proﬁle. (Findings of Fact Nos.
15, 27, 51 and 52)

21. The Board also failed to prove that the January 27, 2014 IEP satisﬁed IDEA’s substantive
requirement that it be reasonably calculated to enable the student to receive educational beneﬁt.
Rowley at 206—07 (1982). The Student was not entitled to a "potential—maximizing education"
(id. at p. 197, fn. 21) but was entitled to one that "confers some educational beneﬁt” (id. at. p.
200) and “is likely to produce progress, not regression.” Cerra 1n Pawling Cent. Sch. Dist. 427
F.3d 186, 191 (2d Cir. 2005).

13

 

July 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16-0220

22. The absence of a residential program as well as any services or accommodations
targeting her nonverbal learning disability, mathematics disability and ADHD rendered the lEP
unlikely to produce progress for the Student. Indeed, the Student was already failing several of
her classes and had earned only one high school credit at ARCH when the January 27, 2015 IEP
formalized her preexisting program there. (F indings of Fact No. 3 8)

23. While the unilateral placement at Greenbrier was not perfect, it did provide an
0pp01tunity for the Student to access her education. The program was designed to create a
sufﬁcient opening, through the efforts of the Student’s therapist and other staff to integrate
behavioral, emotional and academic interventions across all waking hours, for the Student to
learn. The school’s quantum learning approach, small class size and structured program were
also reasonably calculated to beneﬁt the Student. Greenbrier also offered the opportunity for the
Student to earn high school credits. Accordingly, Greenbrier was an appropriate program for the
Student.

24. Trails was also reasonably calculated to provide educational beneﬁt. The Trails program
embedded academics into the expedition portion of its program and additionally offered
classroom experience in its base camp and science laboratory. The concurrent therapeutic
services and activities supported the Student in the academic portion. The Student was able to
earn three high school credits at Trails.

25. A parent’s unilateral placement need not meet the standards that are generally applicable
to public school placements, but need only be reasonably calculated to provide educational
beneﬁt. School Committee ofBurlington v. Department ofEducation, 471 US. 359, 369 (1985);
Draper v. Atlanta Independent School System, 518 F.3d 1275, 1286 (11‘h Cir. 2008); Frank G. v.
Board of Education, 459 F.3d 356, 367 (2d Cir. 2006); Warren G. by and Through Tom G v.
Cumberland City School District, 190 F.3d 80, 84 (3d Cir. 1999).

26. The Board claims that the Student’s parents attempted to conceal from the Board that the
Student abuses alcohol and/or marijuana. In this regard, 1 do not ﬁnd the evidence convincing
that the Student has an alcohol or marijuana addiction that interferes with her learning. Without
a doubt, she has used alcohol and marijuana on several occasions throughout her high school
career. But none of her mental health professionals identiﬁed this as a signiﬁcant concern for
her leaming. More importantly, however, there was no evidence that the parents ever attempted
to conceal any facts about the Student’s alcohol or marijuana use.

27. The Student also argues that the Board violated Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act and
that a remedy should be imposed accordingly. Section 504 prohibits discrimination based on
disability in programs and activities that are funded by the federal government. 29 U.S.C.
Section 794(a). Under Section 504, a public school system must provide a “free appropriate
public education” to qualiﬁed disabled students. 34 C.F.R. Section 104.33(a); MarkH. V.
Lemahieu, 513 F.2d 922, 936—37 (9th Cir. 2008).

28. I was appointed under the authority of R.C.S.A. Sections 10—76h—l et seq and 34 CPR.
Sections 300.500 et seq to hear and decide due process complaints relating to the identiﬁcation,
evaluation 01‘ educational placement of children with disabilities or the provision of a free

appropriate public education for children with disabilities under IDEA and Connecticut special

14

 

July 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16-0220

education law. My jurisdiction does not include the determination of legal claims under Section
504.

29. Nonetheless, even if I did have jurisdiction under Section 504, the claim would require
dismissal. The Student’s case under Section 504 required a showing that the Student’s
educational needs were not met as adequately as are the needs of non—disabled students. Mark H
V. Lemahieu, 513 F .2d 922, 936-37 (9‘h Cir. 2008). To ﬁnd a Violation of this obligation would
thus require a comparative analysis of how well the Board provides for disabled versus
nondisabled students. There was insufﬁcient evidence presented in this hearing upon which to
form any conclusions in this regard. Accordingly, the Section 504 claim must be dismissed.

30. Whereas here, a special education student is not offered a free appropriate public
education and is parentally placed in a private school that is reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational beneﬁts, the student is generally entitled to reimbursement for the
expense of the unilateral placement. Florence City School District Four v. Carter by and
through Carter, 510 US. 7, 15 (1993); 34 CPR. Section 300.148.

31. Furthermore, when a student’s emotional and behavioral problems are closely intertwined
with his or her learning problems such that a residential program is necessary for the student to
receive educational beneﬁt, the residential program, including non-medical care and room and
board, must be provided by the school district at no cost to the student. 34 C.F.R. Section
300.104; Mrs, B v. Milford Public Schools, 103 F.3d 1114, 1122 (2d Cir. 1977).

32. Accordingly, the Student here is entitled to reimbursement for the expenses incurred in
matriculating at Greenbrier and at Trails based on the Board’s failure to offer FAPE.

33. The Student also seeks a compensatory education award in this case. Impartial Hearing
Ofﬁcers have broad discretion to fashion appropriate remedies in due process cases, including to
award compensatory education as an equitable remedy for denial of FAPE. Draper v. Atlanta
Independent School System, 518 F.3d 1275, 1285 (11‘h Cir. 2008); Reid ex rel. Reid v. District of
Columbia, 401 F. 3d 516, 523 (DC. Cir. 2005).

34. Compensatory education should be designed as a “replacement of educational sewices
the child should have received in the ﬁrst place" and should "elevate [the Student] to the position
he would have occupied absent the school board's failures." Reid ex rel. Reid v. District of
Columbia, 401 F. 3d 516, 518, 524-27 (DC. Cir. 2005). An award of compensatory services is
not based on an established logarithm, but instead on equitable considerations. Reid ex rel. Reid
12. District ofColumbia, 401 F. 3d 516, 524 (DC. Cir. 2005).

35. In this case, the Student seeks an order of reimbursement for the expense of the
Schleuderer and North Star evaluations as a compensatory education remedy. Typically, a
Student is entitled to secure evaluations from providers of the Student’s choice at public expense
when the Student disagrees with a school district’s evaluation. 34 C.F.R. Section 300.502. That
is not the case here. The Schleuderer and North Star evaluations were performed before the
Board conducted its evaluations and were not secured because the Student’s parents disagreed
with the Board’s evaluations.

15

 

July 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0220

364 In addition, these evaluations were not secured for any reason related in any way to the
Board’s delay in completing its Child Find obligation. Indeed, the Schleuderer and North Star
evaluations were secured before the Board’s Child F ind obligation was triggered. Accordingly,
it is not appropriate to award the expense of these evaluations as a compensatory education
remedy for Violation of Child Find.

37. No other remedy for the Board’s approximately three-week delay in completing the Child
Find process appears appropriate either. The Student was being educated, albeit in the same
inappropriate manner, even before the IEP was put in place. Since a remedy is awarded for the
deﬁcits of that program, a separate remedy for a delay in its implementation is unnecessary.

38. The Board argues that equitable factors arising from an alleged lack of transparency
about the Student’s alcohol and/or marijuana use argue for a reduction of any remedy ordered in
this case. Equitable factors are generally relevant to the calculation of remedies in special
education eases. C.L. vi Scarsdale Union Free School District, 744 F.3d 826 (2d Cir. 2014).

39. The evidence here did not, however, establish that the parents tried to hide information
about the Student’s use of alcohol and marijuana from the Board. Throughout the process, the
Student’s parents provided the Board with copies of all the reports and documents they had and
signed all consents and releases for conﬁdential records that were requested of them.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board of Education did not satisfy its Child Find duty when it failed to timely
identify the Student as eligible for special education and related sewices and provide an
individualized education program. No separate remedy, however, is appropriate for this
violation.

2. The Board of Education did not offer the Student FAPE after J anuary 27, 2014. The
Student’s unilateral placements at Greenbrier and Trails were appropriate for the Student.
The Board shall reimburse the Student for the expense of those placements, including
transportation

3. The Student’s claim under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act is dismissed.

16

 

If the local 01' regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A)t

mm

Hearing OftTe/er Signature

4m! FEMD

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 ’

