May 13, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0385

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Griswold Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney Susan Pearlman
Pearlman and Swafford
PO. Box 455
Glastonbury, CT 06033

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Alyce L. Alfano
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Haitford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Does the Student require special education and related services as deﬁned in the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act(1DEIA)?

2. Is the Student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of a free and
appropriate public education (FAPE)?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive F APE as deﬁned in the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEIA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut
General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and p1acement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents
requested that the Student be found eligible to receive special education and related sewices.

The Board denied the Parents’ request; the Parents disagreed with this decision.

On March 2, 2016, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. An
impartial hearing officer was appointed on March 2, 2016 and a pre—hearing conference was
scheduled for March 14, 2016. In an electronic transmission, the Parents’ attorney advised the
hearing ofﬁcer that the Parents were withdrawing their request for due process without prejudice.
The Board did not object. The date for mailing the F inal Decision and Order is May 13, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local 01' regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title'ZO, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

