October 21, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0086

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Meriden Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attorney Erin Shaffer
New Haven Legal Assistance Association, Inc.
426 State Street
New Haven, CT 06510

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Haitford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq., Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board violate child ﬁnd by not evaluating the Student in a timely manner?
Should the Board have performed psychological and psychiatric evaluations as
recommended at the June 9, 2015 PPT before recommending a diagnostic placement?

3. What is the Student’s stay-put?

4. Is the student entitled to compensatory education for the denial of FAPE?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed and is not entitled to receive F APE as deﬁned in the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and
Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting,
the Parent stated that the Board had violated “child ﬁnd.” The Parent requested that the Student
be identiﬁed as eligible to receive special education and related services. The Board refused the
Parent’s request.

On August 10, 2015, the Board received notice of the Parent’s request for due process. The
paities agreed to forego a resolution meeting and agreed to a mediation session. The date of the
mediation session was pending.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on August 10, 2015 and a pre-hearing conference
was held on August 19, 2015. A hearing date of October S, 2015 was chosen by the parties.

In an electronic transmission the Parent’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter had
been resolved and withdrew the hearing request with prejudice. The date for mailing the Final
Decision and Order is October 23, 2015.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education 01' the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requin'ng special education does not take

' action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the healing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 
 
  
 

  

, , \(_ y
Healing Qﬁzfé’eTASi'gnahlre

*Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

