June 20, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0470

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Montvil1e Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Courtney P. Spencer
The Law Ofﬁce of Courtney P. Spencer LLC
100 Riverview Center, Suite 120
Middletown, CT 06457

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Anne H. Littieﬂeid
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:
1. Did the Board of Education offer the Student a free appropriate public education?
. Does the Student require a residential placement?

3. If the Board of Education did not offer the Student a free appropriate public education,
is The Learning Clinic an appropriate program?

4. If The Learning Clinic is appropriate, is the Student entitled to reimbursement for the
expenses of The Learning Clinic?

5. Is the Student entitled to compensatory education services?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter
on June 10, 2016. This Impatial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on June 13,
2016. On June 14, 2016, the Student reported that the case had been settled and requested that
the matter be dismissed with prejudice.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed
with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬂﬂé/

Hearing thger Signature

ANN FEIKD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

