October 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0614

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl v. Sherman Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Phillip J . Cohn
Goldman Gruder & Woods, LLC
200 Connecticut Avenue
Norwalk, CT 06854

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Rebecca Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 061034919

Appearing before: J anis C. J erman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s Parents
via Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing dated June 15, 2016.2 It was received by the
Board of Education (“BOB”) on June 17. The 30-day resolution period ended July 17 and the
original deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was August 31. A telephonic pre-hearing
conference was he1d on July 19. Attorney Cohn appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney
Dorsey appeared on behalf of BOE.

ISSUES:

1. Is the Board of Education’s proposed placement beginning with the 2016 extended school
year appropriate?

2. 1f the answer to Issue #1 is in the negative, is Devereux Glenholme an appropriate
placement for Student?

During the pre-hearing conference, the panties mutually agreed to the stay—put placement and
entry of such order. The following order was entered: Absent a mutual agreement between the
paities, Student’s stay-put placement shall remain the day program at Devereux Glenholme with
transportation until the Hearing Ofﬁcer has rendered a decision in this case.

On August 19, Student’s Attorney requested an extension of the deadline to mail the ﬁnal
decision and order to “accommodate the provision of an IEE and availability of expeits” and “to
accommodate the scheduling of mediation given the summer months coupled with the

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student" and
“Student’s Mother” in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2016 unless otherwise indicated.

 

introduction of new counsel for the Board.” After fully considering the positions of the parties,
the request was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended 30
days to September 30. On September 20, Student’s Attorney requested an additional extension of
the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order to allow the parties to schedule hearing dates
after mediation, which was scheduled for September 22. After fully considering the positions of
the parties, the request was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was
extended 30 days to October 30. Hearing was scheduled for October 25.

On October 14, Student’s Attorney indicated that the panties settled the matter and reduced the
agreement to writing and withdrew the case.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed.

 

I ‘ 4.
' If 1511:; local or regional board of cducation or the uniﬁed school distdct responsible for
' ."providing special education for the student requiring spc'cial education does not take

21-5601; 021 the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬂccn days aﬁcr .
receipt Lharcof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce thc

ﬁndings or prcscription ofthe hearing ofﬁccr.

. Appeals mm the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be-made to state or federal
com by either party in accprdancc With the provisio'ns of Section 4—183, Connecticut
Gcngral Statutes, and Title 20 United States'Codc 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

;earin armg Of ﬁocr Signature

39m {3 c. .qa‘zwiww

, Edging Oﬂicer Name inPrint .

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

