April 6, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0391

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Bristol Board of Education V. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se
Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Should the Board conduct an Ecological Evaluation of the Student’s environment at
public expense?

2. Should the Board conduct an Independent Functional Behavioral Assessment (F BA) of
the Student at public expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Other Health Impaired and is entitled to receive FAPE as
deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C.
§1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement
team (PPT) meeting, the Parents requested an Independent Ecological Evaluation and an FBA 0f
the Student. The Board refused the Parents’ request. The Board ﬁled for due process.

The patties agreed to go to a resolution meeting. The date for the resolution session was pending
An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on March 4, 2016 and a pre-hearing conference was
held on March 14, 2016. In an electronic transmission, the Board’s attomey advised the hearing
ofﬁcer that the parties were able to resolve the issues and requested that the matter be withdrawn.
There was no objection by the Parent. The withdrawal was granted. The date for the mailing of
the Final Decision and Order is April 15, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED.

 

If the local 01' regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
couﬂ by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title'ZO, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

"x

  
 

Man

"4273

 

Hearingbf Mfﬂgﬁ/

    

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sjgnpagedoc (ho disk)

’ 4/1/04

 

 

