November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Greenwich Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Gerry McMahon, Esq.
Danielle McGee, Esq.
Law Ofﬁces of Gerry McMahon, LLC
98 Mill Plain Road, Suite 3B
Danbury, CT 06811

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Abby Wadler, Esq.
Assistant Town Counsel
Town of Greenwich
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board provide F APE for the two years prior to the ﬁling of the Hearing
Request?

2. Did the Board offer FAPE for the 2015-2016 school year?

If the Board did not provide FAPE, is placement at the Pinnacle School appropriate?

4. Should the Parents be reimbursed for their unilateral p1acement of student at Pinnacle
school?

51 Should Parents be reimbursed for tuition and education expenses for placement of
Student at Lindamood-Bell for the summer 2015 and the 2015—2016 school year?

6. Should parents be reimbursed for their payment of evaluations of Student?

7. Should parents be reimbursed for their payment of occupational therapy services for
Student?

8. Do the circumstances warrant an award of compensatory education?

5"

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request on September 30, 2015, which
was received by the Board the same day. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on October 6,
2016 and conducted a Prehearing Conference on October 29, 2015, wherein the hearing
issues above were identiﬁed and an initial hearing date was scheduled for J anuary 11, 2016.
The J anuary 11 hearing date was cancelled due to the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s scheduling conﬂict
and rescheduled to January 20, 2016.

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

The hearing convened on J anuary 20, February 23, March 1, March 15, March 18, March
21, March 23, Apri126, April 27, May 5, May 17, May 26, June 9, June 24, June 28, June
29, and September 12, 2016. The Parents presented the following witnesses: Student,
Mother, F ather, Shelly Lacey-Castelot, Special Education Literacy and Assistive
Technology Evaluator, Rebecca Vanech, Educationa1Eva1uat0r, Lisa Stizver, Greenwich
High School (“GHS”) School Psychologist/Evaluator, Laura Conte, Education Director at
Pinnacle School, Erin Knight, Special Education Teacher/Math Teacher, Pinnacle School,
Dr. Vivian Koda, Neuropsychologist/Evaluator and J oanne Sabato, Pinnacle School Speech
and Language teacher. The Board presented the following witnesses: Joan O’Day, GHS
School Social Worker, Hildy Riccardi, GHS Regular Education English Teacher, Mara
Adelsberg, GHS Guidance Counselor, Brigid Barry, GHS English Department Chair,
Stephanie Ryan, GHS Regular Education History Teacher, Mary Beth Smith, GHS Regu1ar
Education English Teacher, Cassandra Echevaria, GHS Regu1ar Education Reading
Specialist, Karen Passamano, GHS Speech and Language Pathologist.

The Board’s exhibits B—l to B—2 and B—4 t0 B-41 were admitted as full exhibits. All pages
in B-3 (which purported to be a copy of an Individualized Education Program (“IEP”)) were
stricken except for pages 31, 32 and 35. The parties agreed that Exhibit P—64 is an accurate
copy of that IEP. (T ranscript 1/20/16). Later Exhibit B—3A was substituted as the accurate
IEP in question. The Parent exhibits P- 4 through P— 117 were admitted as fu11 exhibits.
Exhibit P—l to P—3 were marked for identiﬁcation purposes only. The Due Process
Complaint/Hearing Request was admitted as HO—1. The parties’ Joint Stipulation 0f Facts
was read into the record and admitted as HO—2.

This Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the parties’ requests for extension of the mailing dates of the
Final Decision as follows: On December 22, 2015, the mailing date was extended to
February 12, 2016. On January 20, 2016, the mailing date of the Final Decision was
extended to March 29, 2016 add hearing dates. On March 15, 2016, the mailing date of the
Final Decision was extended to May 9, 2016 to add hearing dates. On April 27, 2016, the
mailing date of the F ina1 Decision was extended to June 9, 2016 to add hearing dates. On
May 17, 2016, the mailing date was extended to July 1, 2016 to add hearing dates. On June
21, 2016, the mailing date of the F inal Decision was extended to July 29, 2016 in order to
add a hearing date. On June 29, 2016, the mailing date was extended to August 29, 2016 to
add hearing dates. On July 18, 2016, the mailing date was extended to September 30, 2016.
On September 12, 2016, the mailing date of the Final decision was extended to November 4,
2016 to allow the parties to submit briefs and proposed ﬁndings of fact by October 11, 2016.
Both parties submitted briefs on October 11, 2016.

This Final Decision and Order sets fOIth the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings of facts
and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference certain exhibits and witness
testimony are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All evidence
presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent the summary, procedural
history and ﬁndings of facts actually represent conc1usi0ns of law, they should so be
considered and vice versa. See SAS Institute Inc. v. S & H Computer Systems, Inc., 605
F . Supp. 816 (M.D. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F Callallen Independent School Board,
835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993). A11 motions that were not previously ruled upon are

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

hereby denied.
S UMMARY :

The issues in this Due Process hearing involve whether the Greenwich School Board failed
to provide a free and appropriate public education to a high school student with the
exceptionaiity of speciﬁc learning disability. Student’s diagnoses are: language disorder,
social pragmatic communication disorder, speciﬁc learning disorder with impairment in
reading, comprehension, and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder combined type ADHD.
Upon enrollment in the Board’s high school, Student was at a 5‘h grade instructional reading
level. Student received Special Education services through small group instruction in a
resource room and individual and group instruction by a speech and language pathologist as
well as a social skills group. After two years, Parents rejected the Board’s proposed IEP and
unilaterally placed Student at Pinnacle School. Parents seek reimbursement for tuition,
education related services, and the Lindamood-Bell Visualizing and Verbalizing Program.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.)
§10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(f) and related regulations,
and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.), C.G.S. §§4-
176e to 4—178, inclusive, §§4-181a and 4—186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

After cohsidering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary evidence
and testimony of witnesses, I ﬁnd the following facts:

1. Student was born on July 29, 1999 and currently lives in the town of Greenwich.
(Stipulation of F acts)

2. Student has been described in different settings as “a wonderful kid with a big heai ”,
kind, caring, “extremely polite and respectful” and someone “who puts forth her best
effort”; “an outgoing, engaged, participatory student who wants to do well.” (B-12, B-
28, Testimony, Ryan, Testimony, Mother)

3. Student was born with severe health complications that required signiﬁcant medical
attention. Her early milestones were delayed and at approximately age 2, she was
diagnosed with oculomotor dysfunction, binocular dysfunction and Visual perception
delay. (B-1 1, B-13, Testimony, Mother)

4. Student participated in the Birth to Three program for early intervention and began
intensive speech therapy at 22 months. (B-13).

5. Student’s diagnoses are: language disorder, social pragmatic communication disorder,
speciﬁc learning disorder with impairment in reading, comprehension, and attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder combined type ADHD. (Stipulation 0f Facts)

3

 

November 3, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16-0176

6.

10.

11.

Student attended International School at Dundee, Riverside of the Greenwich Public
Schools (GPS) from Kindergaiten t0 2”d grade and received special education and
related services from GPS. During this time, the Student experienced difﬁculty socially,
including social isolation and incidents of harassment and bullying. Parents requested
intervention of school staff and were not satisﬁed with the school’s response.
(Testimony, Mother)

The Parents privately retained Dr. Nelson Dorta, PhD to conduct a nem‘opsychological
evaluation of Student when she was in the second grade. Dr. Dorta’s report included a
thorough analysis of domains in the areas of the neurocognitive system critical to
leaming. With respect to academic functioning, Dr. Delta noted that although oral
reading speed was below average, Student’s ability to decode was excellent. Student
performed far below grade level in reading comprehension. Student’s computational
skills were in the above average range and accurate. Student’s ability to write a stem to
a prompt picture fell in the average range. Her ability to elaborate was less developed in
a higher level of writing calling for character and scene development. (B—13,
Testimony, Mother)

Dr. Doﬁa’s clinical impressions were that Student had persisting areas of deﬁcit rooted
in a likely neurodevelopmental disorder of genetic origin. Speciﬁcally, Student
experienced problems with altieulation, ﬂuency as well as with higher order linguistic
processing with the latter being further affected by poor sustained attention. Her non—
verbal/visual spatial skills were weak, mostly at the levels of complex organization and
integration of information. Student displayed below expectations in areas of executive
functions and higher order problem skills. Dr. Dorta diagnosed Student as having
Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder Combined type (ADHD-C). He noted that
Student’s variable executive ability “was rooted in primary attentional and working
memory deﬁcits that result in “toppling” 0f the process needed for more complex
problem solving. This combined with her language comprehension deﬁcits does have
adverse effect on her social and academic functioning. (B-13)

At the social level, her disabilities limit what she attends to in an interaction (e.g.
missing nuances and cues due to inattention), and how well she understands the
dynamics of the interaction (e.g. effect of the processing and integration problems).
These difﬁculties also further complicate her ability to organize and remember complex
information in the classroom and with peers. (B-13)

[Student] displayed great difﬁculties with reading comprehension and
sequencing/comprehending verbally presenting information.” In addition to ADHD—C,
Dr. Dorta diagnosed Student with Reading Disorder (Comprehension subtype) due to
language processing and working memory deﬁcits and Language Disorder. (B-13)

Dr. Dorta recommended a number of strategies to assist Student in the classroom setting.
One recommendation was to give information through both Visual and auditory channels
to help with encoding and consolidation of information. (B—13)

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

The parents unilaterally placed Student at Eagle Hill School (EHS) for grades 3-8.
Parents felt that Student beneﬁtted from small classes and direct instruction at Eagle
Hill, While at EHS, the Student received direct instruction in reading. Student made
slow but steady progress while Student was being educated at EHS. Student made
friends and participated in team sports and was developing social skills. (B—25,
Testimony, Mother and Father.)

As EHS’s program ended at grade 8, Parents decided to re-enroll Student at Greenwich
Public High School for two reasons: Student’s older sister attended Greenwich High
School Student and Student wished to attend the same school as her older sister. The
course syllabus at Greenwich High School presented a variety of courses that Student
would enj oy. (Testimony, Mother)

Enrollment at Board School and Proﬁle ofStudent’s disabilities and unique needs

Parents re-enrolled Student in GPS in spring of 2013 while Student was still attending
the 8th grade at Eagle Hill and made a referral to Special Education and Related
Services. (P—4 and P—S). A Planning and Placement Team meeting (“PPT”) was held on
May 7, 2013. The attendees were Brigid Barry, Administrator, Mother, Michael
Galatioto, Regular Education Teacher, Cathy Mayo, Special Education Teacher, Joan
O’Day, Social Worker, Karen Passamano, Speech and Language, Mara Adelsberg,
Guidance and Lisa Stizver, Evaluation team. The Mother signed consent to the team’s
proposal to conduct an initial evaluation with the following assessments as part of the
evaluation: individual administered assessments on executive functioning and working
memory, reading, writing and math; rating social, emotional and behavioral observations
and rating scales; receptive/expressive language assessments and a social/developmental
history to determine social and academic functioning. (B—6).

The following psychological, intelligence and education assessments were conducted as
part of the psychoeducational evaluation: a records review, classroom obsewations, and
the following assessments: Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children - 2nd Edition
(KABC—H); Wide Range Assessment of Memory and Learning — 2nd Edition Auditory
Attention and Executive Functioning; NEPSY — 2nd Edition (NEPSY—H), Behavioral
Assessment System for Children - 2“d Edition (BASCZ) Parent and Teacher Rating
Scales; Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive F unction (BRIEF) Parent, Teacher and
Self Report Rating Scales; Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children -IV; Wechsler
Individual Achievement Test - 3rd Edition— 111; Clinical Evaluation of Language
Fundamentals (CELF-4); Test of Language Competence—Expanded Edition (TLC—E);
Test of Problem Solving -Ad01escent: 2 (TOPS—A22) and Social Language Development
Test Adolescent.

The evaluators noted the following:

a. Student was obsewed to be on task 100% of the time, indicating that she was
attentive and available for learning within a highly stmetured environment.

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

h. In intelligence testing, Student obtained a Full Scale IQ score of 77, however
Student’s overall intellectual ability could not be interpreted meaningfully
because there was too much variability in the four indexes that composed the IQ
score. The Student’s greatest weaknesses were in perceptual reasoning
(Borderline range) and processing speed (Extremely Low range).

c. In testing of cognitive and processing abilities (KABC—II), Student performed in
the Low Average and Borderline ranges.

d. While Student’s working memory skills fell within the average range, Student’s
Visual memory skills, which involved recall of visually complex scenes fell
within the 2“d percentile at the lower end of the Borderline range. Although
Student’s ability to take in information in short—term memory, manipulate
information to meet the task demand and produce an accurate response was an
area of strength in a highly structured environment with minimal external, this
would not be true of the classroom environment. In the classroom environment,
she would experience difﬁculties in working memory and sustaining attention
due to external stimuli.

e. On the educational evaluation and achievement testing (WIAT— III), Student
demonstrated average to high average writing skills, including spelling,
formulating sentences with vocabulary words in context and writing a
composition. However, Student had difﬁculty reading social situations;
difﬁculty expanding and developing her language and ideas.

f. The educational evaluation recommendations included suppmt in the areas of
reading comprehension, ﬂuency and problem solving; having Student repeat and
paraphrase what she has heard or understood in order to check accuracy and to
provide an opportunity for rehearsal. Ultimately, teaching seIf—initiated
“comprehension checking” strategies; information should be pre—organized to
reduce demands on working memory; providing Student with greater
organization for a task and demonstrating where to begin; a social skills group;
providing opportunities for seIf-monitoring her task performance and social
behavior; encourage Student to identify her strengths and weakness for speciﬁc
tasks or activities; allow for comparison of pre—activity prediction and
performance with post activity evaluation.

g. In the assessment by the Speech and Language evaluator, Student scored lowest
in the areas of F igurative Language -1% Very Low (TLC-Expanded Edition),
Interpreting Intents, 1%- Very Low (TLC-Expanded Edition), Problem Solving -
7% Borderline (Social Language Development Test Adolescent), Making
Inferences 7% (TOPSZ-A), Determining Solutions 7% Borderline (TOPSZ-A).
The Speech and Language evaluator stated that “[Student’s] ability to
comprehend literal language is an area of strength, while her ability to
comprehend information at the abstract level is a challenge for her.”

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

17.

18.

19.

201

21.

At EHS, Student’s 8th grade academic courses were Tutorial, Literature, World History,
Writing and Math. In June of 2013, EHS produced an exhaustive repelt of Student’s
learning proﬁle, instructional strategies and progress in all academic areas as well as
suggestions for effective teaching strategies for Student. (B—25)

EHS’s report presented Student’s complex educational proﬁle, strengths and
weaknesses. The report outlined the need for direct instruction in areas of
understanding abstract relationships; abstract problem solving and social thinking.
Student’s disabilities impacted her learning in the academic areas of reading,
communication, speech and writing. Additionally, abstract words and ideas are difﬁcult
for Student to grasp without ﬁrst providing background information, visual presentation
and re-teaching with application of the abstract concepts to different situations. The
relevant portions of the report of academic functioning and effective strategies and
modiﬁcations are below. (B—25) ’

Student mastered skills in a small math class (1 :4 teacher/student ratio) that consisted of
small group instruction that emphasized concepts and operations, problem solving,
number sense and units in practical application areas, Student received the following
modiﬁcations to the math curriculum: providing study guides as reference, providing
repeated exposure to instructed vocabulary words and concepts, providing ongoing
review of previously instructed material, using a calculator to facilitate computational
accuracy, providing teacher modeling, providing sample problems. (B—25)

Similarly, Student had mastered most of the mechanics of writing. She had totally
mastered the ability to write an essay consisting of two to four paragraphs and had
mastered in isolation ﬁve or more paragraphs. She could write paragraphs with a topic
sentence, sort details related to a topic and develop and support main ideas. She required
direct instruction to use Vivid verbs and varied vocabulary. (B—25)

Student’s disabilities had greatest impact in the areas of language alts, literacy and social
studies. Her disabilities impaired her ability to comprehend ﬁgurative language and
abstract concepts. The following are excerpts of the report that provide insight to the
Student’s level of performance and unique needs for instruction and modiﬁcations at the
end 0fthe 8‘“ grade. (13—25).

Language Arts Tutorial Class

a. Student received intensive remedial instruction in Tutorial for language arts
during two school periods for 40 minutes totaling 80 minutes per day on a
weekly basis.

b’. Though Student was in the 8‘“ grade, the materials used in the class were written
on approximately the 5‘h grade reading level, The 5th grade level was an
instmctional reading level geared to developing skills. The Tutorial was taught
at a reading level higher than the Student’s independent reading level through a
small group with direct instruction by a teacher. (B«25, Testimony, Vanech)

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

C.

e.

The concepts and skills being taught in the Tutorial were decoding; spelling rules
and sight words; vocabulary words drawn from reading; comprehension and
written expression. (B-25)

Student had mastered the following skills at the 5‘“ grade reading level at the end
of the 8th grade:

Decoding: decoding one-syllable words and words containing instructed
syllable types With afﬁxes added; recognize word roots and afﬁxes and use
these to help decode unfamiliar words; decode instmcted sight words.

Spelling: spell one—syllable word, words that contain vowel teams, words that
contain vowel diphthongs and silent letter combination in words, spell words
containing instructed syllable types with afﬁxed added, spell instructed sight
words, recognize word roots and afﬁxes and uses these to help spell
unfamiliar words, identify spelling)

Vocabularv words drawn from reading: use teacher or text provided clues to
determining meaning and unfamiliar terms, complete objective format
vocabulary exercises, apply knowledge of instructed vocabulary to
comprehend reading.

Comprehension: recalls facts and details, sequence plot events, relate
personal experiences in reading, apply previously read information to current
reading

Written Expression: use capitalization; use ending punctuation, write
complete sentence. (B—25)

Student had mastered in isolation, but not in conlexl, the following skills at the
5th grade instructional reading level skill:

Spelling: con‘ect spelling errors in composition.

Vocabulary words drawn from reading: complete oral sentences using
instructed terms, incorporate vocabulary into written exercises, understand
multiple means of vocabulary terms.

Comprehension: make predictions, make inferences, make reasonable
emotional responses to reading, discriminate between relevant vs. irrelevant
information, identify theme from context of reading.

Written Expression: identify instructed parts of speech, proofread for
mechanical and contextual errors.

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

f. Student required direct instruction by a teacher and was working on the
following skills at the 5‘h grade reading level:

Vocabulary words drawn from reading; identify, deﬁne and utilize
vocabulary terms, use resources to deﬁne unfamiliar vocabulary (e.g.
notebook, study guide)

Comprehension: summarize a story, identify character traits, compare and/or
contrast events, characters, settings, etc., form appropriate Visual readings
from the reading, develop opinions, etc., identify cause-effect and if—so
relationships, compare/contrast books and themes interpret poetry.

Written Expression: summary paragraphs. (B-25)

g. Classroom modiﬁcations that were identiﬁed as useful for Student included the
following:

i. Vocabulary: giving several opportunities to uSes instructed vocabulary in
structured activities, providing frequent review to ensure mastery.

ii. Comprehension: reviewing unfamiliar vocabulary and background
information prior to reading, incorporating role play activities to aid in
Visualization, highlighting information that will help with interpretation
of material, requiring uses of instructed reading strategies.

iii. Written Expression: providing a model, script 01‘ guided questions,
encouraging completion of graphic organizers to organize and elaborate
ideas. (B25)

Literature Class

h. Student’s Literature class instructed in reading comprehension, vocabulary, and
literary concept skills. Student took this class for one period of 40 minutes per
day weekly.

i. The materials used to teach Student through reading for enjoyment to encourage
independent reading. The materials were written on approximately a 4”1 grade
reading level. Concept and skills included: a number of vocabulary words drawn
from reading; literary concepts, including instruction of: author, setting, plot,
characterization, conﬂict, imagery, point of View, tone, mood, ﬂashback,
foreshadowing, symbolism, stereotype, types of literature (ﬁction and
nonﬁction); F igurative language concepts instmcted, included alliteration, irony,
metaphor, simile; and comprehension.

j. At the end of the 8‘h grade, Student had not totally mastered any of the skills in
the class but mastered the following in isolation:

 

November 3, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16—0176

Comprehension: sequence plot events, identify character traits, and relate
personal experiences to reading.

k, Student required direct instruction by a teacher in the following areas:

Vocabulary: identify, deﬁne and utilize vocabulary terms, use teacher or text
provided clues to detemﬁne meaning of unfamiliar terms, complete oral
sentences using instructed terms, incorporate vocabulary exercises,
understand multiple meanings of vocabulary terms, use resources to deﬁne
unfamiliar vocabulary (e.g. notebook, study guide), apply knowledge of
instructed vocabulary to comprehend reading.

Literacy concepts/ ﬁgurative concepts: alliteration, irony, metaphor, simile:
deﬁne instructed literacy concepts, identify instructed literacy concepts,
create examples of instructed literacy concepts.

 

Comprehension: recall facts and details, summarize a story, make
predictions, make inferences, compare and/or contrast events, characters,
settings, etc., apply previously read information to current reading, form
appropriate Visual images from the reading, develop opinions about the plot
theme, characters’ actions, etc., make reasonable emotional response to
reading, discriminate between relevant vs. irrelevant information, identify
cause-effect and if-so relationships, identify theme from context of reading.
(B—ZS)

1. Two areas of literacy instruction that had not yet been introduced to Student
included comparing and contrasting books and themes, and interpret poetry. (B—
25) '

m. Classroom modiﬁcations that were useful for Student included:

i, Vocabulary: reviewing unfamiliar vocabulary words and background
information prior to reading; providing several opportunities to use
instructed literary terms in structured activities; providing frequent
review to ensure mastery; giving several opportunities to use instructed
vocabulary in structured activities.

ii, Comprehension: Providing illustrations, pictures, objects to help
Visualize the reading; limiting the number of pages assigned; highlighting
the information that will help with interpretation of material; requiring
use of instructed reading strategies (e.g. reciprocal reading, summarizing
scripts); requiring use of study guides or other resources as reference;
encouraging the use of responses modeled by teacher.

World History I Class

10

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

11. The History Program used a multimodal approach incoxporating textbooks,
lectures and Visual aids that matched Student’s ability.

0. Student mastered some geography skills and required direct instruction to use
grids and lines to ﬁnd locations.

p. The class studied historical themes and world religions. Student had mastered
the following skill: deﬁne and utilize vocabulary terms; read and understand time
lines.

q. Student had mastered in isolation but not in context the following skills:
sequence key historical events, discuss the impmtance of geographical features
on the development of a culture, identify the cycles of exploration, immigration
and development of societies, explain the impact of economics on the
development of cultures.

r. Student required direct instruction to explain systems of government and discuss
the impacts of periods of peace and war.

3. In the area of Comprehension and Applied Study Skills in the social studies
class, Student masteredjust one skill: use relevant information to make logical
predictions.

t. Student mastered in isolation but not in context the following skills: retain
instructed information, generalize previously learned material to understand new
concepts, compare and contrast concepts, discriminate fact from opinion,
recognize and explain cause-effect relationships, take complete notes from
lectures, identify main ideas, use unit chapter headings, prepare for objective
tests, prepare for essay tests.

u. Student required direct instruction for the following skills: take complete notes
from written sources, paraphrase main ideas, use table contents, use glossary
index, scan for pertinent information, formulate a working outline prior to
researching, use varied resources to take notes and complete a rough draft and
use corrections and suggestions to edit into a ﬁnal product.

v. Classroom modiﬁcations useful for Student in this class included the following:

i. Vocabulary: giving several opportunities to use instructed Vocabulary in
structured activities, providing frequent review to ensure mastery and
retention, encouraging the use of study guides, glossaries or other
resources to recall deﬁnition of terms.

ii. Comprehension:_providing guided questioning, requiring use of speciﬁc
strategies (e.g. listen for repeated information), anchoring more abstract
concepts to background knowledge, moderating the rate of teacher
speech, providing illustrations, pictures, objects, etc. to help visualize
concepts under study.

11

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

22.

23.

24.

25,

iii. Applied Study Skills: presenting notes on the board, requiring use of
strategies to study for tests (e.g. review notes, create possible test
questions); providing teacher or peer assistance to study for tests, and
providing assistance to organize a project.

Pragmatic Language Repelt:

w. At EHS, Student also paiticipated in a weekly Pragmatic Language Group
designed to provide explicit instruction in and opportunities to practice the
abstract, dynamic concepts of language—based social thinking and related
pragmatic language skills. Student required instinction in the following areas:
use appropriate voice volume, greet adult and classmates, understand appropriate
e1assroom routines and behaviors, offer compliments, address someone by name
before beginning a conversation, interiupt conversations effectively, shift topic
of conversation when appropriate. Group skills that Student required instruction
in included: listen to others, take turns, share, ofﬁce comp1iments, remain with
the group, transition out of the group, invite others to join a group, identify good
spmtsmanship.

The EHS report stated that a number of instructional strategies and modiﬁcations are
most important to Student’s success, which included the following:

0 Provide Visuals when presenting information in a lecture format and providing
her with extra time to copy notes

. Provide direct instruction on comprehension strategies.

Upon enrollment, Student took a writing test for English language placement.
Previously, GHS had an English class with a level of instiuction for students with
special needs. At the time of her placement, GHS had phased out this English class.
(Testimony, Barry). '

The writing test required Student to respond to one of a number of writing prompts.

The directions included the following: “Before you write, you might want to 1ist 01‘
outline some of the ideas that come to mind as you think about your topic.” Of the
prompt topics, two mentioned newspapersf One topic prompt asked the student to
respond to the critique that newspapers and other forms of entertainment were examples
that today’s culture lacked creative imagination, good taste, artistic merit and adequately
disciplined skills. The second topic prompt asked the writer to give examples of a recent
newspaper article that revealed the strength or weaknesses of human beings. (P—96)

Student responded with an essay about why newspapers can be ﬁm and entertaining.
Presumably, she meant to respond to the former topic prompt, as that prompt had both
the words “enteltainment” and “newspapers”. Student missed the meaning of the topic
question entirely. However, despite this, the GHS English Department Chair
responsible for placement considered this off topic essay as 9m grade level and
determined that the appropriate placement should be in English Language Arts 112, a 9th

12

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

grade English class for average students. She made this placement determination based
upon her assessment that Student could write well-formed paragraphs. (P—96,
Testimony, Barry)

The Ninth Grade IEP

The Board convened a PPT on June 20, 2013 to review evaluations and determine
eligibility. The Board determined that Student qualiﬁed for Special Education and
Related Services under a language-based learning disability. The Parents signed consent
for special education placement. (Stipulation of Facts). At this time, the PPT had the
results of the evaluations and the EHS repon described above.

The attendees were: Lisa Strizver, Psychologist, Karen Passamano, Speech Pathologist,
Cathy Mayo, Special Education Teacher, Lucy Arecco, Regular Education Teacher,
Brigid Barry, Administrator, J oan O’Day, Social Worker, Mara Adelsberg, Mother and
Father.

The Special Education teacher reviewed the proposed IEP. The Board members of the
PPT proposed that the Student be in a regular education reading comprehension class.
03-5)

In addition, the PPT proposed the following services: Special Education: 11 sessions or
58 minutes per week of group instruction in the resource room. Related Services: 30
minutes of individual instruction in Speech, 30 minutes of group instruction in Speech
and 58 minutes of group counseling. (B—S)

Program modiﬁcations included: Materials/Books/Equipment: may need modiﬁed
worksheets, may need speciﬁc study guides, access to computer, calculator;
Tests/Quizzes/Time: may take in Resource Room, may take in sections, may review
before. Extra Time 200%, Modiﬁed Tests, Simplify Test Wording, Test Read; Grading:
modiﬁed curriculum, Grade Effort plus Work, Modiﬁed Grades; Organization: may
need study outlines, may circle multiple choice items - bubbler. Instructional Strategies:
modiﬁed homework, and classwork, reteaching of material, check work in Progress,
Concrete Examples, Extra Drills/Practice, Have Student restate information. (13—5)

The EHS report made frequent reference to reviewing unfamiliar vocabulary words and
background information prior to introducing reading to increase reading comprehension.
This was not included in the IEP. (B—S, B-25)

Lisa Stizver is a school psychologist and was on the evaluation team. She testiﬁed that
one instructional strategy that would have assisted Student was pre-teaching
information. However, this instructional strategy was not included in the IEP.
(Testimony, Strizver, B-S)

Two additional instructional strategies were reported by EHS as being important to
Student’s success were not contained the IEP: They were: 1) Provide visuals when
presenting information in a lecture format and providing her with extra time to copy

13

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

notes and 2) Provide direct instruction on comprehension strategies. Neither of these
was included in the IEP. (B—S, B-25)

Annual Goal # 4 states: “[Student] will improve her reading comprehension in order to
successfully complete her mainstream work”. This reading goal addressed a large part
of Student’s disability in just one general goal for reading comprehension.

Objective # 1 states that “using mainstream and supplemental coursework, [Student] will
identify details, verbally and in writing in response to questions for a given reading.”
However, at EHS, Student had already mastered the ability to identify details. EHS
repaited mastery in the area of reading comprehension in recalling facts and details,
sequence plot events, relate personal experiences in reading, apply previously read
information to current reading. (B-5, B-25).

Annual Goal # 4, Objective #2 states that Student will “identify details to suppoﬁ a
theme of a story in response to questions for a given reading selection”. However,
Student had already mastered this skill in concept while at EHS. Student’s difﬁculty
was with identifying the theme of a paiticular story, not in the details to support it. The
problem was not that Student was not able to spot details once a story was presented.
Student had already mastered these skills. (Testimony, Lacey-Castelot, B-5, B-25)

The difﬁculty in reading comprehension, according to the EHS report, was that Student
could not understand the main idea of a story that is being presented. There was no goal
directed to this difﬁculty. (B-S, B-25)

Shelly Lacey-Castelot is a highly qualiﬁed expeit. She is the Director of Literacy
Solutions, where she provides independent and Board recommended assistive
technology and literacy-based evaluations, direct instruction, and consultation with
PPTs. She has worked as a teacher in a number ofpublic school systems in remedial
reading and language arts to students with learning disabilities. She had also previously
worked as a researcher in the use of assistive technology for students with reading
disabilities. She testiﬁed that the appropriate goal in reading comprehension would have
addressed the Student’s ability to “inference” as opposed to identifying details. She
further testiﬁed that it was not appropriate for Student to use grade level curriculum
materials given the Student’s 5‘h grade instructional level vocabulary and
comprehension. (Testimony, Lacey-Castelot, P—54).

Annual Goal #6 stated that “[Student] will improve her essay writing skills in order to be
successful in the mainstream classes. Objective #1 states that Student will “write at least
two suppoiting details within each paragraph of an essay without repetition.” Again,
this is a skill that Student had already mastered at EHS (B—S, B—25).

The 9th grade IEP provided for 30 minutes of individual speech and language on a
weekly basis for two sessions of 15 minutes each. Additionally, Student participated in
a group session for one hour a week with another student. Karen Passamano was the
Student’s 9lh grade Speech and Language Pathologist, She testiﬁed that she wrote the
IEP goals and used a set of therapeutic materials called “Social Thinking” in

14

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

implementation of the IEP. She testiﬁed that she also used curriculum material that was
being covered in class and used the material to determine whether Student was making
progress. Ms. Passamano’s data sheets consisted of pluses and minuses representing
whether the Student correctly responded to her questions. She testiﬁed that based upon
her sessions she would then convey Student’s progress to Cathy Mayo, the Special
Education Teacher. However, there is no record of what questions were being posed
and what responses were gaged as appropriate. The Parents argue convincingly that Ms.
Passamano’s data is entirely subjective in nature. Further, it cannot be said that Ms.
Passamano’s related speech services could be direct instruction on reading
comprehension. (Testimony, Passamano, B-S).

Student began to struggle with the English Language Arts and Social Studies curriculum
from the beginning of the school year. One of the ﬁrst books being read in the 9‘h grade
English 012153 was Antigone, a Greek play rich in ﬁgurative language Parents began
writing to school teachers about Student’s difﬁculty reading the book and the stress
Student was experiencing trying to understand the story. Throughout the year, the
Parents witnessed the Student’s anxiety and struggle with homework. (Testimony,
Mother)

The Father testiﬁed that upon reviewing the books that Student was assigned for
reading, he researched the Leine level of the books online at the Lexile website to
determine the grade level comprehension of the books. He found out that these
textbooks were instructionally at the 9‘h grade level, far higher than the Student’s ability
to comprehend. (Testimony, Father, P—98, P-99).

The PPT met in March of 2014 at Parents’ request. Teachers reported that the Student
was making progress and reviewed Student’s report cards. The team members agreed to
revise the IEP to reﬂect an additional hour of resource room time for a writing module
and “pull out” for speech therapy. However, the total service hours remained the same
but merely shifted to resource room time. (13—4)

The Board presented high grades in Student’s report as evidence that Student had been
making good academic progress. Student consistently received A’s in her classes.
However, teacher witnesses could not deﬁnitively testify that the Student made progress
in her classes (B—15, B-22)

The Student’s modiﬁed grades in the A range reﬂected “Grade Effort plus Work.”
Given the fact the Student had been universally regarded by her teachers as
conscientious and hardworking, the Board’s supporting evidence is unconvincing, (B-S)

Further, the grades may not be a re1iab1e indicator of what Student actually learned. For
instance, Parents presented samples of the Student’s work product and resulting grades.
In a History class assignment to discuss why the Arab Spring failed, the Student wrote
an unintelligible response and received a mark of 8/10 or 80%. In another assignment,
the Student appeared to have copied and paraphrased the book jacket to a Harry Potter
book as her book report. She received full credit and an excellent grade despite the

15

November 3, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16-0176

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Mother calling attention to the fact that the Student had copied the book jacket.
(Testimony, Mother, P—21 , P—25)

Exhibit P-ZZ is a copy of the modiﬁed quiz for the book “Lord of the F lies” and study
guide for the quiz. Many of the questions in the study guide mirror the test questions.

Student testiﬁed about her academic experience in her freshman and sophomore years at
Greenwich High School. She testiﬁed that her experience in English and Social Studies
were “not great,” because she “read so many hard books both of those years.” She
testiﬁed that she could not understand the books she was reading. She testiﬁed “the plot
was confusing” for “all of them”. She testiﬁed that in her sophomore year, she had an
aide that she shared with others in the class and that her resource room teacher for her
freshman and sophomore year, Mrs. Mayo, helped her sometimes and would read the
books to her when she needed help with those classes. (Testimony, Student).

The Board’s regular education teachers testiﬁed that Student received support and
instruction with her English and social studies assignments in class or the resource room
but this is contradicted by what the Student i'epmted to her parents and in a reading
survey in school. The Mother testiﬁed that the Student was always anxious and
overburdened with homework and frequently reported that she did not understand the
books she was reading in English Language Arts. The Student reported in response to an
“Independent Reading Survey” that only 0-25% of required reading was done with
teachers. (P—12).

The Special Education Teacher was not a witness at the hearing. The IEP called for
quarterly work samples and data sheets to suppmt progress in reading and writing. The
Board could not produce these samples 01‘ data sheets at the hearing. (B-S).

In the spring of her freshman year, Parents retained Rebecca Vaneeh to conduct an
evaluation on Student’s progress. The Mother testiﬁed that the Parents were getting
assurances from teachers that the Student was doing well when at the same time Student
was experiencing stress in keeping up with school work and repoited that she did not
understand much of what was going on in English and Social Studies. (Testimony,
Mother)

Rebecca Vanech is a Connecticut and New York certiﬁed special education teacher and
Kindergaiten 7 Adult Literacy Specialist. She currently provides independent remedia1
tutoring and executive functioning coaching. She is a former special education teacher in
both private and public schools. (P—55). She performed a reading evaluation of Student
in May of Student’s freshman year at GHS. Ms. Vanech testiﬁed that the Student was
reading at the same instructional level at the time of her assessment as when the Student
was in the 8th grade at EHS. Ms. Vanech’s evaluation report demonstrates that the
Student did not derive any educational beneﬁt from the GHS program. (B- 25,
Testimony, Vanech)

T enth Grade IEP

16

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

The PPT met on June 11, 2014 to conduct an annual review and transition planning.
The attendees were: Brigid Bany, Administrator, Mother, Father, Cathy Mayo, Special
Education Teacher, Helen Blackburn, School Psychologist, J oan O’Day, Social Worker,
Karen Passamano, Speech and Language pathologist, Mara Adelsberg, Guidance
Counselor, Rosemarie Ampha, Administrator, Mother, Father, Attorneys Gerry
McMahon and Danielle McGee, Parent Attorneys, Attorney Abby Wadler, Board
Attorney.

Prior to this meeting, the Parents shared the results of Rebecca Vanech’s evaluation.
The school team members stated that they did not have enough time to review the
evaluation. (P-64, Testimony, Mother).

The minutes noted that the Student was not eligible for assistive technology but that the
team agreed at Parent request to conduct a consult with the district assistive technology
coach during the next school year to determine appropriate technology
recommendations. It is undisputed that this consult never occurred (P—64).

The Greenwich Assistive T echnology Review form was completed by the PPT and a
check was placed next to the statement that “Assistive Technology is not necessary at
this time. Student’s needs are cun‘ently being met.” However, the form also sets faith a
number of considerations that were not checked as being considered, including the
consideration that “Further investigation may be necessary to determine what, if any,
assistive technology devices/services may be required.” It appears that the school team
determined that no assistive technology was necessary and foreclosed the possibly of
any consideration. The only reason assistive technology was considered as a possible
supplementary aid was because the Parents requested it. The team had never considered
it as pait of the planning process.

The Parents presented evidence, through their Literacy/Assistive Technology expert,
Shelly Lacey—Castelot, that Assistive Technology would be beneﬁcial for the Student’s
access to the curriculum. Ms. Lacy-Castelot testiﬁed that considering the Student’s
auditory problems and processing speed, one simple assistive technology could be an
Echo smart recording pen or an audionote on her computer to allow her to have access to
reviewing information she might have missed in class. She also testiﬁed that a text-to—
speech software could help in reading by reducing the load on the Student’s memory.
The Board members of the team dismissed the possibility of the use of assistive
technology using a pre—prepared checklist and moving on without exploration and fair
consideration of useful tools to help the Student access the cuiriculum.

The PPT proceeded to present the proposed lEP for the next school year without
reviewng or discussing Parents’ private evaluation.

The PPT convened on August 26, 2014 to review the Vanech evaluation. The attendees
were: Rebecca Vanech (identiﬁed by her maiden name Obrinsky), Educational
Evaluator, Cathy Mayo, Special Education Teacher, Helen Blackburn, School
Psychologist, Joan O’Day, Social Worker, Karen Passamano, Speech/Language, Cassie
Echevarria, Regular Education Teacher, Mother, Father, Attorney Danielle McGee,

17

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

Parent Attorney and Attorney Abby Wadler, Board Attorney. The following changes
were made to the IEP. Resource room time was change to a total of 96 minutes per 8
school days. Speech and Language time was to be 30 minutes per 8 days for group and
30 minutes per 8 days for individual instruction. Despite the concerns related in the
evaluation, PPT reduced the special education hours by more than 4 hours per week in
the 10‘11 grade. Speech services time was also reduced. The minutes state that the
special education teacher and literacy teacher “reviewed ways that the English/Social
Studies classes, and the Literacy Workshop will address areas identiﬁed in the
evaluation.” The IEP remained essentially the same as that presented in June of 2014
without the evaluation.

Exhibit P—l4 is a copy of the Student’s Resource Room log from the 10'h grade from
October 2014 to March of 201 5. It is quite apparent from reading the log that little, if
any, time in the Resource Room were used to address Student’s IEP goals. Student
reported time spent “relaxed”; did other topics such as wellness homework, American
Sign Language homework, met with the social worker, worked on chemistry. (P-l4).

Although the Board presented many general education teachers witnesses, the Board
presented no evidence concerning special education services in reading, writing and
math at the Due Process Heating. Except for report cards, the Board presented no
evidence of objective measures supporting progress in the special education program.

Student took the PSAT in the 10‘h grade. She scored in the 61“ percentile in math, 17‘11
percentile in critical reading and 9‘h percentile in writing skills. She scored 0 in
reasoning and inference and 0 in words used to modify and compare.

Dr. Vivian Koda, is a CT and NY licensed neuropsychologist and Director of
Neuropsychological Assessment Sewices, LLC, where she provides
neurodevelopmental assessments of the cognitive behavioral function of adolescents.
Dr. Koda conducted a neuropsychological evaluation of Student in the spring of the 10‘h
grade. (P-53)t Dr. Koda made a number of recommendations in the areas of reading,
written language, math, executive function and social cognition. She recommended an
extended school year program. For reading, she recommended support from a program
such as Lindamood Bell Visualizing and Vei'balizing program to help Student with
concept imagery for reading and listening, writing and building Vocabulary. Like Ms.
Lacey Castelot, she recommended the use of recorded books, such as Bookshare. She
also recommended technology for recorded text and an Assistive Technology
assessment. (B—8)

11'” Grade IEP

A PPT was convened on June 3, 2015 to conduct an annual review and transition
planning and to review Dr. Koda’s repoﬁ. Again, the team noted that Assistive
Technology was not required but a screen would be requested. It would appear that the
10th assistive technology consult never was conducted. Further, the team apparently
failed to consider even the most basic assistive technology aids such as Bookshai‘e, a
library of recorded books. Considering the Student’s oculomotor disability, this could

18

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

have easily been added to the IEP. Nevertheless, the request for assistive technology
was again dismissed out of hand and put off for a screening. In response to the
neuropsychological report, the minutes state that team members “reviewed the
recommendations by category and discussed how they are addressing each area in
[Student’s] IEP. (B—2).

At the PPT, the Parents disagreed with the Team that the Student had made appropriate
progress. They requested out of district placement in an integrated language program
and the Visualizing and Verbalizing program at Lindamood-Bell. The Parents’ request
was denied.

On July 1, 2016, the Parents sent notice that they were rejecting the 11“1 grade IEP and
would be placing the Student at Pinnacle School in Stamford, Connecticut and seeking
reimbursement for tuition and education related costs. (B—27).

The Father testiﬁed about how he had lost faith after the GHS staff did not appear to
consider the independent evaluator’s recommendations and follow through with the
promised assistive technology consult. The Student had spent almost two years at
Greenwich High School. The Parents repeatedly raised the same concerns about the
need for direct instruction and provided private evaluations with no response from the
Board and the Student did not seem to be progressing. (Testimony, Father)

Pinnacle School

Pinnacle School is an Approved Special Education Program by the Connecticut State
Depa1tmentofEducation. (Testimony, Conte)

When Student entered Pinnacle School, Student was still reading at a 5‘h grade
instructional reading level. (Testimony, Knight).

This was the same instructional reading level the Student was reading at the end of the
8th grade at EHS. (B—25) ’

Pinnacle School staff provided direct instruction and employed many of the
recommendations of Dr. Koda and Ms. Vanech. Additionally, a reading program was
designed to meet the Student’s unique needs. By spring of the 11th grade Student was
able to read independently at the 5th grade reading level, which is signiﬁcant growth.
Student has learned to employ reading strategies, internalize them and then employ them
independently. Whereas, the Student was dependent upon prompting and cuing from
GHS staff to apply strategies, Student is now able to employ'the skills she learns
independently. She uses assistive technology. She takes notes using a smart pen and
uses the recording to create outlines to study or ﬁll in missed notes independently. (P-

1 15, Testimony, Knight).

Student’s speech and language teacher at Pinnacle discussed the progress that Student
had made in areas of social cognition. At the hearing, she presented infomnal

19

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

73.

monitoring data, consisting of subtests 0f CELF—4, to show that student had been
making gains over months. (Testimony, Sabato).

F inally, Pinnacle School provides Student with independent life skills class called
“Reality Bites” to prepare Student for transition after graduation. Student receives direct
instruction and practice in real world skills (e.g. budgeting, balancing a checkbook,
making thoughtful decisions while shopping) in preparation for transition into
postsecondary life. (Testimony, Father, Testimony, Knight)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

There is no dispute that Student is eligible to receive a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) and related services as set forth in the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C Sec 1401, et seq. and its implementing regulations
codiﬁed at 34 CFR §300 et. Seq., and under Conn. Gen. Stat. Sect 10-76.

The purpose of the IDEA is to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to
them F APE that emphasizes “special education and related services designed to meet
their unique needs” and “prepare them for further education, employment and
independent living” and “to ensure that the rights of children with disabilities and
parents of such children are protected. . .” 20 U.S.C. §1400(d)(l).

The Act deﬁnes FAPE as special education and related sewices which “(A) have been
provided at public expense, under public supervision and direction, and without charge;
(B) meet the standards of the State Educational Agency; (C) include an appropriate
preschool, elementary, or secondary school education in the State involved; and (D) are
provided in conformity with the individualized education program required under Sec.
614(d).” 20 U.S.C. §1401 (8).

The Board has the burden of proving the appropriateness of the Student's program and
placement, which burden shall be met by a preponderance of the evidence. Regulation
of Connecticut State Agencies (R.C.S.A.) Sec 10-76h-l4.

The standard for determining whether a Board has provided a free appropriate public
education is set foith as a two-pait inquiry in Board of Education of the Hendrick
Hudson Central School District v Rowley, 458 U S 176(1982). The first question to be
determined is whether the Board complied with the procedural requirements of the Act?
The second question to be detennined is whether the Individualized Educational
Program is "reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational beneﬁts?”
Rowley, 458 U S at 206-207

Addressing the ﬁrst prong of the Rowley inquiry, the initial procedural inquiiy is not a
formality. As the Supreme Court noted in Rowley, Congress’s emphasis in the IDEA
“upon the full participation of concerned parties throughout the development of the
lEP,” together with the requirement for federal approval of state and local plans, reﬂects
a “conviction that adequate compliance with the procedures prescribed would in most
cases assure much if not all of what Congress wished in the way of a substantive content

20

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0176

10.

in an IEP.” 458 US at 206. " Walczak v F lorida Union Free School District, 27 IDELR
1135 (2d Cir 1998). The procedural guidelines of the IDEA are designed to guarantee
that the education of each child with disabilities are tailored to meet the child’s unique
needs and abilities. 20 U.S.C. § 1412 and 1415. These procedural guarantees are
procedural safeguards against arbitrary and erroneous decision—making. Daniel RR. v
State Board of Education, 874 F.2d 1036, 1041 (5‘“ Cir. 1989). Compliance with the
IDEA’S procedural requirements is the responsibility of the board and not the parents.
Um'ﬁedSch. Dist. V Dept. ofEd, 64 Conn. App. 273. 285 (2001).

However, a procedural Violation of the IDEA does not, in and of itself, warrant a change
in the child’s educational placement. In order to conclude that procedural Violations
resulted in a denial of a free appropriate public education, the parent must show that the
procedural errors resulted in a loss of educational opportunity. See Burke County Bd. 0f
Educ. v. Denton, 895 F .2d 973, 982 (4‘“ Cir. 1999); Evans v. District No. I 7, 841 F .2d
824, 830 (8‘“ Cir. 1988). Procedural ﬂaws do not automatically require the Hearing
Ofﬁcer to ﬁnd that a denial of FAPE has occurred, instead, the hearing ofﬁcer must
determine if the procedural inadequacies resulted in the “loss of educational
opportunities or seriously infringed upon the parent’s opportunity to palticipate in
formulating the [IEP] . . .”

Proeedura1 vio1ations that interfere with parental participation in the IEP formulation
process undermine the very essence of the IDEA. Amanda J. ex rel Annette J. v. Clark
County Sch. Dist. 267 F.3d 877 (9‘“ Cir. 2001). An IEP addresses the unique needs of
the child and cannot be developed if those people most famihar with the ehi1d’s needs
are not involved or fully informed. IDEA expects strong participation at PPT meetings.
Warren G. v. Cumberland County Sch. Dist. 190 F.3d. 80 (3d Cir. 1993). The IEP is to
be a collaborative process developed by the parents of the student, educators and other
specialists. Hoem’g v. Doe 484 US 305, 311 (1988).

The failure to provide meaningful palticipation to parents as a pent of the IEP process
can result in a denial of FAPE. School districts should consider input and p1acement
options raised by parents. See LTM. v. Capistrano Uniﬁed Sch. Dist.,_556 F.3d 900 (9th
Cir. 2008), cert. denied_130 S. Ct. 90 (2009). The Parents provided the school with
EHS’s comprehensive report and there is no evidence that the repon was discussed or
considered in developing the Student’s 9‘“ grade IEP. As a1'esu1t,the 9‘“ grade IEP
repeated many skills already mastered by the Student before entering GHS. Had the
sehoo1 team considered the repmt, an IEP would have been planned to meet the then
present academic functioning of Student. Further, the failure to consider the report led
to the school team ove1‘1ooking important strategies for student success. If these
strategies had been employed, the Student might have progressed. (Finding of Facts No.
17,18,19, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31)

The school team members of the 10‘“ and 11‘“ grade PPTs made predeterminations about
the lack of need for assistiVe technology and refused to consider Parents’ evaluator’s
suggestions. There was no discussion 01‘ consideration of Parent concerns. The 10‘“
Grade Annual Review PPT deferred consideration for an assistive teehno1ogy
consultation to the beginning of the next school year. When the next school year came,
the team did not follow through. Again in planning for the 11‘“ Grade IEP, the team
predetermined that there was no need for assistive technology. Again, the team deferred

21

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

the consideration AT screening to a later date. The minutes of the PPT indicate that a
decision had been made without allowing full consideration of the usefulness of assistive
technology. The fact that the Student has beneﬁtted from assistive technology in her
current p1acement is evidence that this procedural Violation has resulted in loss of
educational opportunity. (Findings of Fact No. 55, 56, 57, 64, 67, 71).

As to the second inquiry of whether the IEPs were reasonably calculated to enable the
child to receive educational beneﬁts, the IDEA does not itself aitieulate any speciﬁc
level of educational beneﬁts that must be provided through an 1131’. The Supreme Court,
however, has speciﬁcaﬂy rejected the contention that the "appropriate education"
mandated by IDEA requires states to "maximize the potential of handicapped children”
Walczak v Florida Union Free School District, 27 IDELR 1135 (2d Cir 1998), citing
Rowley, supra; KP v Juzwic, 891 F Supp 703, 71 8 (D Conn 1995). The IDEA requires
"the door of public education [to] be opened for a disabled child in a "meaningful‘ way.“
Walczak, 142 F.3d at 130. However, it does not guarantee "everything that might be
thought desirable by loving parents." Id. at 132.

An appropriate public education under IDEA is one that is likely to produce progress,
not regression. Id. Whether the program is "individualized on the basis of the student's
assessment and performance” is also considered when determining the appropriateness
of an IEP. See A.S. v. Board of Education of West Hartford, 35 IDELR 179 (D. Conn.
2001), aff'a’, 47 Fed. Appx. 615 (2d Cir. 2002) (citingMC. ex rel Mrs. C. v. Voluntown
Bd. ofEduc., 122 F.Supp.2d 289, 292 11.6 (D. Conn. 2000).

The Student’s program was not individualized on the basis of the student’s functional
status in the 9‘“, 10th and 11‘h grade IEPs and did not meet the unique needs of Student.
(Findings of Fact No. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47, 48, 56, 57).

The Board, having the burden of proof, did not present any evidence that the Student
received the specialized instruction as stated in the 9th and 10th grade IEPs. (Findings of
Fact N0. 50 and 61).

The evidence of the Student’s Resource Room log is compelling. It demonstrates that a
signiﬁcant p01ti0n the Resource Room time was not dedicated to special education, but
“relaxing” or doing other homework in other topics and not specialized instruction
provided by the IEP. The Board did not present evidence to the contrary. (Finding of
Fact No. 60).

If a district fails to provide a FAPE, the child's parent may remove the child to a private
school and seek tuition reimbursement from the state. Under the Burlington—Carz‘er
framework, a parent may recover tuition reimbursement if: (1) the proposed IEP was
inadequate to offer the child a FAPE, and (2) the private education services obtained by
the parents were reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational
beneﬁts. Sch. Comm. v. Dep’t ofEduc. 0fMass., 471 US. 359, 369 (1985); Carter v.
Florence County Sch. Dist. Four, 950 F.2d 156, 163 (4th Cir. 1991). In addition to the
IEP context, evidence of actual progress is also a relevant factor to a determinatipn of
whether a parental placement was reasonably calculated to confer some educational
beneﬁt. MS. ex rel. Simchick, 553 F.3d at 327.

22

 

November 3, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0176

17. The Parents have the burden of proving the appropriateness of the unilateral placement
by a preponderance of the evidence. R.C.S.A. Sec 10—76h-14(c). The Parents have met
this burden.

18. The unilateral placement at Pinnacle School is appropriate. (F indings of Fact N0. 68,
69, 70, 71, 72 and 73).

19. The educational placements at the Visualizing and Verbalizing Program for the summer
of 2015 and 2015—201 6 school year were appropriate. (Findings of Fact No. 63 and 65).

20. The Parents did not present any evidence regarding the appropriateness of occupational
therapy services and therefore did not meet their burden.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1. The Board did not offer appropriate programs for the two years preceding the Due
Process Complaint.

2. The Board did not offer an appropriate program for the 2015—2016 school year.
3. The Student’s placement at the Pinnacle School is appropriate.

4. The Board is ordered to reimburse the Parent expenses for their unilateral placement
of Student at Pinnacle School.

5. The Board is ordered to reimburse Parents for tuition and education expenses for
placement of Student at Lindamood-Bell for the summer 2015 and the 2015-2016
school year.

6. The Board is ordered to reimburse Parents for their payment of the private
evaluations by Shelley Lacey—Castelot, Dr. Vivian Koda and Rebecca Vanech.

7. The Board is not required to reimburse Parents for their payment of occupational
therapy services for Student.

8. The circumstances do warrant an award of compensatory education as outlined in
paragraphs 4 to 6 above.

23

If the local or regional board of education 01' the uniﬁed school distdct responsible for_
providing special educatibn for the student requiring special éducation does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriaté action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescriptibn of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing officer may be made to state 01' federal
court by either palty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(1)(2)(A).

_ mm,

Hearing/Ofﬁcer Signature

\/

‘ Sylvia Ho
' .eraringOfﬁcer Name in Print

sighpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04 '

 

