December 14, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0157

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Greenwich Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Abby Wadler
Assistant Town Attorney
Greenwich Town Hall
101 Field Point Road
Greenwich, CT 06830

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education offer the Student a free appropriate public education?
2. If not, does the Student require a small classroom learning environment of four or fewer children?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing on September 24, 2015. The Impartial
Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on September 21, 2015. A telephonic pre—hearing
conference was conducted on October 26, 2015. The Student’s father appeared on behalf of the Student
and Attorney Abbey Wadler appeared on behalf of the Board of Education. It was determined that the
initial deadline for ﬁling the Final Decision and Order was December 8, 2016. Evidentiary hearings
were scheduled for December 9, 2015 and December 21, 2015.

On October 23, 2015, the Board of Education submitted a written request for a thirty—day postponement
and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in this case to J anuary
7, 2016. The purpose of the requested postponement and extension was to allow the parties time to
conduct a resolution meeting and to accommodate the scheduled hearing date and afford the parties due
process. The parent obj ected to the requested postponement but it was granted and the deadline was

extended to January 7, 2016.

On December 9, 2015, the ﬁrst evidentiary hearing was convened. At that time, the parties reported to
the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer that they had reached a written agreement for resolution of the dispute.
The Student requested that the matter be dismissed as a result of the parties’ written settlement
agreement. The Board of Education did not obj ect to dismissal of the matter.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the request of the Student for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

fefm

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

€11

fthrEtm)

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

