August 20, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0041

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Ridgeﬁeld Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ESE:
Was the District’s Psychological Evaluation of Student appropriate?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On July 16, 2015, Parents received the Board’s Specia1Education Due Process Hearing Request.
The undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on July 21, 2015. The deadline for mailing the
Final Decision and Order was established as Friday, August 28, 2015. A prehearing conference
was held on J uiy 31, 2015, during which the Attorney for the Board indicated the Parents might
not be able participate in the conference due to a family emergency. The Board’s representation
about the Parents’ reason for not palticipating in the conference was conﬁrmed by the Parents in
a subsequent email received on August 4, 2015. In that email, Parents indicated that
circumstances with Student had rendered their request for an Independent Educational
Evaluation (“113E”) moot. The Board responded with an email indicating they were interpreting
Parents’ email as a withdrawal of the request for an IEE, and would be withdrawing their hearing
request unless Parents responded with a request to proceed with the IEE. The Hearing Ofﬁcer
provided the Parents with additional time to consider the Board’s email and renew their request
for an IEE. The Parents did not renew their request for an IEE within the timeframe provided by
the Hearing Ofﬁcer. On August 10, 2015, The Board sent an email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer
withdrawing the Board’s Special Education Hearing Request.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1n 1i ght 0f the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and T itle 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬁﬂé/ﬂb/ Kfcﬁﬁk—l

/Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

Bathe H» FH’Oﬂ

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

