March 8, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0388

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. New Haven Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Nhi Tran, Esq.
New Haven Legal Assistance, Inc.
426 State Street
New Haven, CT 06510

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Linda Yoder, Esq.
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Sylvia H0, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board predetermine the results of a manifestation determination prior to the
Manifestation Determination PPT meeting?

2. Was the Parent given proper notice and procedural safeguards?

3. Was the Parent denied meaningful paiticipation at the Manifestation Determination PPT
meeting?

4. Did the members of the Manifestation Determination PPT review all relevant
information?

5. Was the behavior in question caused by, or have a direct and substantial relationship to
the Student’s disability?

6. Was the behavior in question the direct result of the Board’s failure to implement the
Student’s IEP?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

 

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint and Request for Hearing on March 2, 2016. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on March 3, 2016 and scheduled a Prehearing Conference for
March 8, 2016. On March 7, 2016, the Parent’s attorney reported to the Hearing Ofﬁcer that the
parties had settled their dispute and that the Parent was withdrawing the Due Process Complaint
with prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

The matter is DISMISSED with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(1)(2)(A).

Hearing’Ofﬁcer Signature

S Ilvia Ho
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04 '

 

