July 14, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0580

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Enﬁeld Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Craig Meuser
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Were the Board’s psycho educational, speech and language, and occupational therapy
evaluations appropriate? If not;

2. Should the Board be responsible for the cost of independent psycho educational, speech
and language, and occupational therapy evaluations?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student is identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) as
deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C.
§1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and placement
team (PPT) meeting, the Parents were not in agreement with the psychoeducational, speech and
language, and occupational therapy eva1uations performed by the Board. The Parents requested
independent psycho educational, speech and language, and occupational therapy evaluations.
The Board denied the Parents’ request and ﬁled for a due process hearing.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 9, 2016 and a pre—hearing conference was
held on June 22, 2016. In an electronic transmission the Parents informed the Board that they
were withdrawing their request for independent evaluations with prejudice. The Board, upon
receiving the notiﬁcation, withdrew its request for due process.

The date for the mailing of the F inal Decision and Order is July 21, 2016,

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

Hearing\bf§({eTSiE11gttge/’

\_/

r

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Pm'nt

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

