May 12, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0288

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student1 v. New Haven Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Nhi Tran
New Haven Legal Assistance
426 State Street
New Haven, CT 06510

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem Moses & Devlin
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney
Via letter dated December 15, 2015.2 It was received by the Board of Education (“BOB”) on
Janualy 2, 2016. The 30-day resolution period ended February 1 and the original dead1ine to mail
the ﬁnal decision and order was March 17. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on

J anuary 18. Attorney Tran appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney Laubin appeared on
behalf of BOE. The following issues were identiﬁed:

1. Did the Board of Education fail to meet its Child Find obligations with regard to Student
in March 2015?

2. Did the Board of Education fail to timely evaluate Student when requested in March
2015?

3. Did the Board of Education fail to provide Student with a free appropriate public
education on and/or after March 16, 2015?

4. If the answer to any of the Issues One through Three is in the positive, What shall be the
remedy?

The panties were scheduled for mediation on March 4. On January 25, Student’s Attorney ﬁled a
request for an extension of the mailing date to accommodate hearing dates after March 11 (7
days after the scheduled mediation). After fully considering the positions of the parties, the
request was granted and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until
April 16. A hearing was scheduled for March 28.

1 In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Fami1y Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S.C. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR§ 99, this decision uses “Student" and
“Student’s Mother” in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2016 unless otherwise indicated.

 

The March 4 mediation was cancelled due to Student’s Attorney’s family emergency and was
rescheduled for May 11. On March 18, BOE’s Attorney requested a postponement of the March
28 hearing date. After fully considering the positions of the parties, the request was granted and
the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order was extended until May 16. A hearing was
scheduled for May 13.

On May 6, Student’s Attorney requested an additional extension of the mailing date to
accommodate settlement discussions. The parties were reminded that under Connecticut
Regulations, the Hearing Ofﬁcer has the authority to giant one extension for continued
settlement discussions. The parties indicated that they were not prepared to ﬁle exhibits and that
they had been participating in on-going discussions and in the planning and placement team
process with success. Student’s Attorney indicated that the outstanding issue relates to relief for
Student and requested to withdraw the matter without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed without prejudice.

 

' If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
' ."groyi'ding special education for the student reqmring speéial education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁccn days aﬁm’ ‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Echahon shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

. Appsals Iron: the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may bemade to state or federal
com by cithcr party in acoprdancc with the provisidns ofScction 4-183, Connecticut
Gengral Statutes, and Title 20 United Statcs'Code 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

;eariz1 mug Ofﬁccr Signature

:er1 x3 (3. @512ij

, Hs'gn'ng Ofﬁce: Name in Print ‘

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

