September 17, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0002

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Studentl v. CTHSS Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Attorney Thomas Cocco
Cocco & Ginsberg LLC
135 Elm Street
Bridgeport, CT 06604

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christine L. Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above-captioned matter was requested by Student’s Attorney Via
Request for 1mpa1tia1 Special Education Hearing dated July 14, 2015.2 CTHSS Board of Education
(“BOE”) received it on July 15. The resolution period ended August 14 and the deadline to mai1 the
ﬁnal decision and order is October 2.

A telephonic pre—hearing conference was scheduled for August 10. Attorney Cocco appeared on
behalf of Student; no one appeared on behalf of BOE. The Hearing Ofﬁcer e-mailed BOE’s Attorney,
Chris Chinni, to remind her to call into the pre—hearing conference. BOE’S Attorney did not call in
during the 17 minutes that the Hearing Ofﬁcer held the call open.

The Hearing Ofﬁcer brieﬂy identiﬁed the issues and the process to Student’s Attorney and Student’s
Grandmother and Aunt who were on the phone. Student’s Attorney indicated the family’s desire to
have the matter resolved prior to the start of the new school year and was informed about the option to
request an expedited hearing. The following issues were identiﬁed for hearing:
1. Did the CTHSS Board of Education fail to conduct an appropriate planning and placement
team meeting to develop or consider Student’s Individualized Education Program for 2015—16?
2. Did the CTHSS Board of Education fail to provide Student with a free appropriate public
education when it denied Student admission to Bullard Haven Technical High School?
3. If the answer to Issues One or Two above aie in the positive, what shall be the 1emedy?
Healing was scheduled f01 September 15. Via 1ette1 dated September 9, Student’ 3 Attomey indicated
that Student’ 3 Parents decided to withdraw the 1equest 1’01 due process.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
In light of the above facts, the above—captioned case is dismissed.

I In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20
USC. § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student”, “Parents”, “School" and
titles of school staff members and cenain other witnesses in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information,
2 All dates are 2015 unless otherwise indicated.

 

1
. .v

i ‘ ifthc local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for

‘ .“Rroyiﬂing spacial education for tha student requiring spcéial education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬂcen days aﬁm- ‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educauon shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndin'gs or- -prcscription of the hcan‘n'g ofﬁccr

. Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be‘made to state or federal
com by either party in accprdancc With the provisidns of Section 4-183, Connecticut
Gcnqral Statutes, and Title 20 United States'Codc 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

ésarin armg Ofﬁcer Signature

3PM 1'5 C. .QEQM-fw

. He'zls‘n'ng Ofﬁcer Name in Print ,

signpage. doc (ho disk)
4/1/0‘.

 

 

