August 17, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-568

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Enﬁeld Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Attorney J ennifer Laviano
The Law Ofﬁces of J ennifer Laviano LLC
76 Route 37 South
Sherman, CT 06784

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Was the Board’s functional behavioral assessment (FBA) appropriate? If not;
2. Should the Board be responsible for the cost of an independent FBA of the Student?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student is identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) as
deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C.
§1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents were not in agreement with the
FBA performed by the Board. The Parents requested an independent FBA. The Board denied
the Parents request and requested a due process hearing. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was
appointed on June 3, 2016 and a pre-hearing conference was held on June 20, 2016. A mediation
date of July 21, 2016 was chosen by the palties.

In an electronic transmission the Parents informed the hearing ofﬁcer that the matter was
resolved in mediation. The Board, also in an electronic transmission, informed the hearing
ofﬁcer that the matter was resolved.

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order is August 17, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

    
  
 

\" ,
Hearhlg\0f§c’551g:;§tqge/’

\_/

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

 

