March 30, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0384

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Enﬁeld Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Maria MorelIi-Wolfe
Greater Haitford Legal Aid, LLC
999 Asylum Avenue, 3rd Floor
Hartford, CT 06105

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the District err when it determined the Student was not eligible for Special Education
at the February 25, 2016 Planning and Placement Team (PPT) meeting?

2. Did the District err when it denied Parent’s request for an Independent Educational
Evaluation?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On March 1, 2016, the Board received a Special Education Due Process Hearing Request ﬁled
by the Parent and the Connecticut State Department of Education appointed this Hearing Ofﬁcer
to preside over the matter. A prehearing conference was set for March 24, 2016. The deadline
for mailing the Final Decision and Order in this matter was May 13, 2016. On March 23, 2016,
the day before the prehearing conference, Attorney for the Parent informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer
that Parent was withdrawing her request for a Special Education Due Process Hearing.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer. ‘

Appeals ﬁ‘om the heating decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

“Hearing Ofﬁcer Sighature

Betta H. Ft to n

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

