J My 20, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0578

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Enﬁeld Board of Education and Student
Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC

One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
1%
Is the Student entitled to an independent education evaluation at public expense?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board of Education requested a special education due process hearing on June 3, 2016.
The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on June 8, 2016. A preheating
conference was convened on July 5, 2016. Attorney Christine Chinni appeared on behalf of
the Board of Education. The Student did not appear because the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer
had incorrect contact information for the Student. When the information was corrected, a
second prehearing conference was scheduled for July 19, 2016. In the meantime, the Board of
Education requested and was granted an extension of the timeline to hear the case and issue a
ﬁnal decision to August 17, 2016.

On July 18, 2016, the Board of Education reported that the paities had reached a resolution of
the dispute and requested that the matter be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Student’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬁ/W

Hearing thc/er Signature

4W FBIRD

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 '

 

