April 21, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Southington Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Pro Se Parents & Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Craig Meuser, Esq.
Chinni and Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Sylvia Ho, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board offer FAPE in the two years prior to the ﬁling of the Due Process
Complaint?

2. If not, is Cheshire Academy an appropriate placement?

3. If not, are Parents entitled to reimbursement of tuition and education related services,
including transportation costs to Cheshire Academy?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/SUMMARY:

The Parent ﬁled the Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request on August 28, 2015, which
was received by the Board on August 28, 2016. The Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed on
August 31, 2016 and conducted a Prehearing Conference on September 14, 2016 wherein
the hearing issues above were identiﬁed and an initial hearing date was scheduled for
October 23, 2015.

The hearing convened on October 23, 2015, J anuary 13, 2015, J anuary 15, 2016, March 14,
2014 and April 8, 2016. A hearing day that was scheduled for December 18, 2015 was
cancelled. The Parents presented ﬁve witnesses. They were Dr. Veronica Scarﬁ,
Psychologist/Consultant and the Independent Educational Evaluator; J acqueline Sutton,
Student’s former teacher at Cheshire Academy; F ather; Mother and Student. The Board
presented ﬁve witnesses. They were Larissa Rodgers, School Psychologist; Susan
Spatafore, Occupational Therapist; Stacey Haber, Special Education Teacher/Case
Manager; Margaret Walsh, Director of Pupil Services and Beth Ozkan, Southington High
School Coordinator of Special Education.

The Board’s exhibits B-1 to B—53 were admitted as full exhibits. The Student exhibits P-1
t0 P-35 were admitted as full exhibits. The Student executed a Power-of-Attorney to her
parents so that they could represent the Student at the Hearing. This Power—of—Attomey
was also made a Student Exhibit P—36. The Due Process Complaint/Hearing Request was
admitted as HO-l. The parties’ J olnt Stipulation of F acts were read into the record and
admitted as HO-2.

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—01 15

This Hearing Ofﬁcer granted the paities’ requests for extension of the mailing dates of the
F inal Decision as follows: On October 23, 2015, the mailing date of the F inal Decision
was extended from November 11, 2015 to January 20, 2016 to add hearing dates. On

J anuary 15, 2015, the mailing date of the F inal Decision was extended to Febmary 22,
2016 to add hearing dates. On February 19, 2016, the mailing date of the Final Decision
was extended to March 22, 2016 to add hearing dates. On March 14, 2016, the mailing
date of the Final Decision was extended to April 21, 2016 in order to add a hearing date.

This Final Decision and Order sets foith the Hearing Ofﬁcer's summary, ﬁndings of facts
and conclusions of law set forth herein, which reference certain exhibits and witness
testimony which are not meant to exclude other supported evidence in the record. All
evidence presented was considered in deciding this matter. To the extent the summary,
procedural history and ﬁndings of facts actually represent conclusions of law, they should
so be considered and Vice versa. See SAS Institute Inc, v. S & H Computer Systems,
Inc, 605 F. Supp. 816 (MD. Tenn. 1985) and Bonnie Ann F. Callallen Independent
School Board, 835 F. Supp. 340 (SD. Tex. 1993). A11 motions that were not previously
ruled upon are hereby denied.

SUMMARY:

The issues in this Due Process hearing involve whether the Board failed to provide a free
and appropriate public education in the two years prior to the ﬁling the Due Process
Complaint for an 18 year old college student who was identiﬁed by the school as “twice-
exceptional” (gifted/disabled). Student believes that the Board failed to provide an
appropriate program because the Board did not have an IEP in place at the beginning of
11‘h grade. Student fulther contends that the Board, among other things, failed to provide
an appropriate reading program and assistive technology and that her special education
teacher bullied her by yelling at her in front of other students. Student is requesting
reimbursement of private school education at Cheshire Academy, a college preparatory
school, the Student attended in the 11th grade.

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION:

This matter was heard as a contested case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
(C.G.S.) §10-76h and related regulations, 20 United States Code §1415(1) and related
regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedure Act (U.A.P.A.),
C.G.S. §§4—176e to 4-178, inclusive, §§4-18la and 4-186.

FINDINGS OF FACT:

The issues concern whether the Board offered a Free and Appropriate Education for
Student’s 11‘h and 12th grade school years. The Student has made a number of allegations,
which are summarized as follows:

Inagggragriafe Reading Program: Student alleges that in response to an April 1, 2013
complaint, the State Depaitment of Education mandated corrective action, which required

2

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

the Board to provide a reading program to help with Student’s reading ﬂuency and that the
Board did not provide this program until the Student’s senior year. (Transcript, 4/8/16 at
139)

“Inadequate Medical Support for a Medically Diagnosed Eve Condition ": Parents and
Student allege that the Board did not adequately accommodate the Student’s vision and
print disability and should have provided medical services for Student’s medically
diagnosed eye muscle disability. Student contends that this violated Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act and the IDEA. (Transcript, 4/8/16
at 140).

Bullying by Board Staff: Student claims that a special education teacher made comments
that were critical and embarrassing to the Student and that this made the Student feel
“stupid”. The Student argues that this constituted bullying of Student and that Board
bullied the Student and did not protect Student from bu11ying a school employee.
(Transcript, 4/8/16 at 140)

Failure to Consider Medical Diagnosis: Student claims that the Board did not
appropriately evaluate the Student’s disability and “fully ignored” the medical diagnoses of
Dr. Susan Danberg, Dr. Phyllis Liu, the 4D Vision Gym, Dr. Collier, and Dr. Kim.
(Transcript, 4/8/16 at 141)

Compliance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA): Parents allege
that they were denied FAPE because Student’s records were not in a centralized location in
Violation of FERPA and that “the school superintendent was trying to intervene and ruin
my daughter’s PPT by not a110wing us to have access to our child’s records.” (Transcript,
4/8/16 at 142-143)

Retaliation by Board ’s Superintendent: Student alleges that the Superintendent retaliated
against the Parents because the Parents ﬁled a complaint with the Department of Consumer
Protection accusing the Superintendent of making a false claim at a public meeting of the
Town of Southington’s Planning and Zoning meeting in 2013. Student claims that the
Superintendent “illegally cut off communications” between Parents and Student’s teachers
and insisted that Parents communicate with teachers through his ofﬁce. Parents and
Student contend that this has damaged the Student’s “academic seIf—esteem). (Transcript,
4/8/16 at 142, 145)

Failure to Provide a Certiﬁed Teacher for Spanish in the 10”’ grade: Student alleges that
the Board’s long term substitute Spanish teacher was unqualiﬁed to teach Spanish to
Student in the 10‘h grade and as a result, the Student was in prepared and was not able to
obtain a good grade in Spanish at Cheshire Academy. (Transcript, 4/8/16 at 145-146)

Failure to offer an IEP for the I I ’h grade school year: Student claims that the Board did
not provide and the Parents did not receive an IEP for the 11‘h grade school year. Parents
and Student claimed that the Board’s coordinator of pupil services “claimed she could not
have a PPT during the summer because of staff.” (Transcript, 4/8/16 at 146)

3

 

April 19, 2016 Fina1 Decision and Order 16-0115

Failure to Provide Appropriate T echrzo/agy: Student alleges that the Board’s provision of
Bookshare, an online library for the people with print disabilities, was inappropriate.
Parents and Student c1aim that the Board offered this assistive technology because it was
free or less expensive than software from Kurzsweil Educational Systems and the Board
offered Bookshare to save monies for the school district. (Transcript, 4/8/16 at p. 148).

Failure to Assist Cheshire Academy with Cheshire Academy ’s Accommodation Plan:
Parents and Student claim that the Board representatives should have worked with Cheshire
Academy to provide an Accommodation plan for Student when she was parentally placed
at Cheshire Academy during her junior year. (Transcript, 4/8/16 at 144)

Failure to Fulﬁll Promises Made at a Resolution Meeting: Parents and Student allege that
Board’s representatives promised at a Resolution Meeting that the Board would match the
Student’s Cheshire Academy 1B curriculum at Southington High School if she returned and
that this promise was not fulﬁlled. (Transcript, 4/8/16 at 144)

After considering all the evidence submitted by the Parties, including documentary
evidence and testimony of witnesses, 1 ﬁnd the following facts:

1, Student was born on October 11, 1997. She was eighteen years old at the time of the
hearing and a student at the University of Connecticut. (Stipulation of Facts;
Testimony Student). The Student was identiﬁed as a child with a disability and eligible
for special education and related services as of the end of ninth grade at a June 27, 2012
Planning and Placement Team meeting (PPT). (Stipulation of Facts). The issues in this
hearing involve the Student’s Individualized Educational Program (IEPs) in the 11th
and 12m grade.

2. Student attended Southington Pub1ic Schools from kindergarten to 7th grade. The
educational record reveals that Student obtained “A” range grades in core academic
classes. (B—3) Beginning in the 3rd grade, the Parents advocated for the Student to be
placed in the Southington School’s Gifted and Talented program but Student was found
not to qualify. (B-19)

3. A group ability test (Otis—Lennon School Ability Test) was conducted in September
2009 when Student was in the 7th grade. Her overall results were in the Average range
(SAI = 101) with comparable verbal and nonverbal skills (verbal : 104 & Nonverbal =
98). 7‘“ grade Connecticut Mastery Tests reﬂect Advance Goal in Math and Writing
and Goal in Reading. Student’s 7'h grade Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) score was
76, which fell within the 7“1 grade expectation. (B-3)

4. Parents referred the Student to Special Education Services to assess her intellectual
ability for Gifted and Talented purposes in 2010 when Student was in the 7th grade.
(B—3). Parents also hired Dr. Veronica Scarﬁ, an educational psychologist as a
consultant. Dr. Scarﬁ describes the family as typical of “very highly educated and
Type—A families" where it is “part of the family dynamic that the child do incredibly
well and get into a good college.” (Testimony, Scarﬁ) Throughout the hearing, the
Parents referred to the Student as “brilliant”. (Testimony, F ather; Testimony, Mother).
The Parents monitored every grade the Student obtained and when the grade fell below

4

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

an “A” range, indicated in notes that the grade “needs to revise to ‘A”’ 01' “Needs help”.
Notations on Powerschool repmts reﬂected the Parent’s anxiety over a grade of 80 on a
quiz -which the Parent planned to discuss with school staff. (P—15)

5. The educational record also reveals that throughout 8th grade to 12‘h grade, the Parents
did not feel that Student’s struggling performance, especially in math and science,
matched her “high gifted ability”. Parents frequently intervened on Student’s behalf
with school staff when they disagreed with classroom teachers and administrators at
various schools. The accusations against school staff in various schools, in some
instances, could be personal in nature. For instance, Parents intervened when the
Student wanted to change her 9th grade math teacher at University High School and was
not successful. When the administration refused, Parents complained the teacher had
“poor classroom management skills”. They accused the teacher of not noticing “there
was a boy snorting cocaine during class.” Administrators eventually denied the Parents
access to this teacher at University High School. (B-19) The Parents wanted Student to
gain admission to an Ivy League school because the Parents believed that Student had
the academic ability. In the 9th grade, Student had hopes of becoming a plastic surgeon.
(Testimony, Mother, Testimony, Scarﬁ)

6. The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children 4th Edition (WISC-IV) assesses children
from age 6 to 16. The assessment was administered in May and June of 2010 when
Student was age 14 and 9 months. The assessment results indicated Superior Verbal
Comprehension skills (VC1=128), High Average Perceptual Reasoning skills (PR1:
119, Average Working Memory skills (SS=109) and Low Average Processing Speed
skills (PSI: 85). Student performed in the below average range on a visual association
and copying processing speed test. The Woodcock-Johnson 111 Tests of Cognitive
Abilities (WJ-HI Cognitive) was also administered and indicated Average Working
Memory skills (SS: 109), Low Cognitive Efﬁciency skills (SS=86) and Extremely Low
Processing Speed skills (38:64). Student performed in the Extremely Low range on
processing speed and cognitive efﬁciency and she performed in the Low Average range
on a processing speed and cognitive efﬁciency task assessing her ability to quickly and
accurately make conceptual decisions. Based upon the results of intelligence testing,
the Student was found not to qualify for special education services; however PPT notes
recommended that she be referred for the school Early Intervention Team (EIT) to
assist with processing speed intewentions. However, no EIT services were provided
because Student transferred out of district to a private school, Talcott Mountain
Academy of Science, Mathematics and Technology (Talcott Mountain Academy) for
grade 8. (B-3)

7. While at Talcott Mountain Academy, Student had academic struggles in biology,
astronomy and math. She had trouble reading and copying assignments from the
blackboard and with completing timed laboratory assignments. Student could not keep
up in Math with same age peers at Talcott Mountain Academy because 8‘“ graders were
leaming Geometry. Student had only taken pre-Algebra in the 7‘h grade and did not
know algebraic concepts. Eventually, Student was placed in a class to repeat Pre—
Algebl'a with a younger group of Students. Parents blamed the Student’s academic
problems at Talcott Mountain Academy on lack of available appropriate instruction at
the school. (B-19)

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

8.

10.

11.

Student attended University High School of Science and Engineering (University High
School) located at the University of Haltford in the 9th grade until March 27, 2012.
(Stipulation of Facts) University High School is a magnet school operated by the
Greater Hartford Regional School Choice Ofﬁce. Entrance to University High School
is through a lottery—based system. At University High School, Student was initially
placed in all honors level classes, including Algebra II. However, Student was placed
in Algebra I mid-year because it proved too challenging for Student. Student also
experienced problems with reading from the blackboard and copying assignments as
well as other academic struggles. The Parents blamed Student’s math problems on the
math teacher. Parents applied for an accommodation plan under Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act but were unable to procure an accommodation plan. (B-19)

Student left University High School and enrolled at Southington Public Schools on
March 28, 2012. Later, Parents referred Student for evaluation for concerns related to
the Student’s academic gaps, processing speed and visual processing skills. A PPT was
convened on May 14, 2012 to discuss the refen'al and plan assessments to determine
eligibility for special education services. (B-2)

The School Psychologist conducted a ﬁle review and updated data on Student’s
functioning. The School Psychologist administered the WlSC-IV processing speed
subtests, WJ-IH Cognitive-subtests related to Processing Speed, Cognitive Fluency and
Executive Processing skills. Results on the WISC—IV reﬂected that Student scored in
the low average range (PSI = 88, 21“ percentile). Student performed within the average
range on processing speed takes which assessed her ability to quickly and accurately
visually scan and discriminate objects in a random and structured arrangement. Results
were consistent with 2010 scores and suggested that Student responded to visual
information at a slower pace. Results on The WJ-III Cognitive reﬂected Average
Working Memory Skills (SS =109), Low Average Cognitive Efﬁciency skills (SS=86)
and Extremely Low Processing Speed skills (88:64). Processing Speed measures the
ability to perform simple and automatic cognitive tasks rapidly, palticularly when under
pressure to maintain focused attentions. Student’s standard score fell within the
Borderline range (SS=73). Student’s scores in the borderline and low average range in
processing skills related to Student’s ability to rapidly search and compare Visual
symbols, and quickly encode and mentally manipulate content. Student performed
within the Borderline range (SS: 76) in executive skills related to sustained attention,
inhibitory control and processing speed. The School Psychologist also administered a
self—report questionnaire, which revealed solidly developed strengths and a few
problematic behaviors with time management strategies that contributed to Student’s
academic problems. Student reported she had difﬁculty ﬁnishing assignments and
would fall asleep completing homework. Student repmted a need for extra time to
complete math tests, classwork and certain writing assignments. (B-3)

The Student was also administered the Woodcock-Johnson III Achievement (WJ-III
ACH F orm B) Standard and Extended Batteries. Achievement testing revealed that
compared to same age peers (14.7); Student had high average oral language skills and
superior oral expression. Her overall level of achievement was high average. Her
ﬂuency with academic tasks was in the low average range. Her oral comprehension
was average. Her math ﬂuency score was in the low range. The examiner

6

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

12.

13.

14.

15.

161

17.

recommended that the Student be given extra time to complete assignments, tests and
quizzes. (B-4)

A PPT convened on June 11, 2012 did not ﬁnd Student to be eligible for special
education services. However, the PPT reconvened on June 27, 2012. Dr. Perri
Murdica, Senior Coordinator of Pupil Sewices/Administrator and Beth Ozkan, Special
Education Coordinator/Special Education Teacher reviewed the evaluations and
requested the PPT to revisit eligibility. The June 27, 2012 PPT members reviewed all
the data and the family’s concerns and agreed Student had a signiﬁcant processing
disorder. (B-6) Student was determined to be eligible for special education at the June
27, 2012 PPT under the eligibility category of Speciﬁc Learning Disability. (Stipulation
of F acts)

The Individualized Education Program (IEP) provided specialized instruction for three
periods of Academic Support per 6—day cycle or 1.86 hours per week. Further, the
Student was provided with the following accommodations: extra time, extra time in
tests/projects/written work, pace long term projects, test study guide, clear
expectations/explanations of next activity, planner and availability of Bookshare.
Instructional strategies included clear expectations, frequent reinforcement, and review
directions. The IEP provided that accommodations were for all courses. In addition,
Student would receive extra time in an alternate setting for the Connecticut Academic
Performance Test (CAPT). Additionally, Transition Planning was discussed at the PPT.
Student indicated an interest in the biomedical ﬁeld as well as engineering and was to
participate in Naviance to begin collecting information to assist in career and college
planning (B—6)

At the end of the 9‘h grade, the Student received the following grades for the following
courses: AlgebraI (L3 Accelerated College Prep) 82; Earth Science (L3) 85;
Engineering Design (L4 Honors/AP) 84; Freshman English (L4) 87; Geometly (L3) 83;
Health 95', Physical Education 92; Physics (L4) (grade transferred from University
High School) 77; Spanish (L2 College Prep) 89. (P—14; B—40)

In the beginning of 10‘h grade, Student took the following courses: Algebra II Honors;
Art I; Biology Honors; English II Honors; Health II; Physical Education and Spanish.
(B-40)

On October 26, 2012, the PPT met at Parent request. The Student was snuggling
academically and failing Algebra II Honors. The PPT added the following new
services: Additional daily instruction for Academic Support. This increased Special
Education services to 7 academic support periods in a 6-day rotation. In addition to
continuing accommodations from the June 27, 2012 IEP, Student was also provided the
use of a laptop for note taking in class. If Student made use of the laptop, the PPT
determined that the laptop would be added to the accommodations page of the next IEP.
The PPT agreed that the Student would be moved from Algebra II Honors to Algebral
Honors even though the Student had taken Algebra I in the 9'h grade. The PPT felt that
retaking Algebra I would help Student learn skills necessary for Algebra II. Student’s
failing grade was removed from the Student’s transcript. (B—7)

On November 15, 2012, the PPT met at Parent request. Student was failing English II
Honors. The PPT agreed that the Student was dropped from English II Honors t0

7

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

English I Honors class and the English 11 Honors grade was removed from the
transcript. (B-8)

The Parents again retained the services of Dr. Veronica Scarﬁ. Dr. Scarﬁ reviewed the
Student’s 2010 and 2012 evaluations and IEPs produced a report dated March 29, 2013.
In her report, Dr. Scarﬁ suggested accelerated learning in the following areas of gifted
ability: Visual arts, written expression, math calculation. She also concluded that the
Student had a dyslexic proﬁle with reading ﬂuency and comprehension issues and
concurrent Attention Deﬁcit Disorder (ADD) inattentive type. She suggested that an
Orton Gillingham trained Reading Specialist conduct a diagnostic reading evaluation
and make recommendations. (B-10, B—l6)

The PPT convened on April 1, 2013 at Parent request. The members of the PPT were
Helen Crowley, Administrator; Father; Mother; Student; Rosanne Carey, Special
Education Teacher; Lee Ann Miller, Guidance Counselor; Gail T. Lessard, Special
Education Department Chair; Dr. Perri Murdica and Beth Ozkan, Special Education
Coordinators; Dr. Martin Semmel, Principal; and Dr. Veronica Scarﬁ. The PPT
reviewed Dr. Scarﬁ’s March 29 report and considered the input of Dr. Scarﬁ. The PPT
agreed to conduct an Assistive Technology and Occupational Therapy review. The
following accommodations were added to the IEP: reader for assessments provided on
request by the Student; content area teachers to adjust homework requirement to
include essential concepts (rather than focus on quantity) when appropriate; weekly
communication to the parent indicating status of assignments in all courses and
feedback from student regarding reason for incomplete assignments (Le. time or
difﬁculty understanding) and plan for completion. Student would participate in after
school sessions with teachers to ensure clear directions, initiation and feedback about
assignments. (B-1 1, B-12)

On the same day, Parents ﬁled a 14 page Complaint with the State Department of
Education. (13-19)

The PPT reconvened on April 30, 2013. The Parents requested an Independent
Educational Evaluation. The PPT agreed that the Board would pay for an Independent
Educational Evaluation to be performed by Dr. Veronica Scarﬁ. (B-l4, B—19).

Dr. Scarﬁ issued a report dated May 31, 2013. Dr. Scarﬁ conducted the following
assessments: WISC-IV; Woodcock Reading Mastery Test - Third Edition (WRMT III);
Behavior Assessment System for Children —2 Rating Scales —Adolescent Form (BASC—
2-TRS-A); Behavior Assessment System for Children ~2-SelfRepo1t of Personality—
Adolescent Form (BASC ~2-PRS-A); Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function
—Self Report (BRIEF-SR); Classroom Observation/Teacher Interview:
Parent/Developmental Interview; F ocus Mental Health Observation (F MHO); Thematic
Apperception Test (TAT); Clinical Interview; 3 Wishes, Sentence Completion Test
(SCT); Records Review.

WISC-IV assesses an age range of up to 16 years of age. At the time of administration,
the Student was age 15 years and 7 months. Dr. Scarﬁ’s WISC-lV assessment
administration were as follows: Verbal Comprehension: 150; Perceptual Reasoning
129; Working Memory 99; Processing Speed 85. Dr. Scarﬁ found that the Student was
profoundly gifted with executive dysfunction in the following areas: mental operations,

8

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

24.

25.

26.

27.

successful planning ability, working memory, mental control, shifting of mental set and
inhabitation of responses. Compromised executive functionng will impact
organization, attention, decision—making, planning and sequencing, regulation,
initiation, and repetition and temper control. Individuals with weaknesses in Executive
Functioning are often unaware of their difﬁculties and exhibit unintentional
noncompliance with activities and/or expectations. Problems with Executive
Functioning can be responsible for a majority of academic struggles. Dr. Scarﬁ also
stated in the report that the Student might have had Meares—lrlen Syndrome, a visual
perception disorder. (B-16).

For the 2013—2014 School Year, Dr. Scarﬁ recommended the following: Provide
Student with syllabi for all courses and delineated grade rubrics prior to the ﬁrst day of
school in separate folders and binders for each course; use of color overlays;
blackboard; explicit teaching strategies; oral testing; AIMS plan; Bookshare;
Audiobooks 01‘ Bookshare with audio; laptop; extended time; academic support
instruction; allow student to begin assignments and complete tasks during study hall;
allow student oppmtunity for talent development. (B-16)

On June 14, 2013, the PPT convened to conduct the Annual Review, review and revise
the Student’s IEP; engage in Transition Planning and Develop the IEP for the Student’s
11‘h grade school year. In attendance at this meeting were: Helen Crowley,
Administrator; Father; Mother; Student; Sharon Mossey, Student’s Regular Education
Teacher; Rosanne Carey, Special Education Teacher; Larissa Rodgers, School
Psychologist; Lee Ann Miller, Guidance Counselor; Susan Spatafore, Occupational
Therapist/Assistive Technology Evaluator; Perri Murdica and Beth Ozkan Special
Education Coordinators; Gail T. Lessard, Special Education Department Chair and D1:
Veronica Scarﬁ, Independent Educational Evaluator. The PPT adopted all the Dr.
Scarﬁ’s recommendations except for color overlays for the whiteboard. Instead, the
PPT substituted for this accommodation by providing all classroom presentations to the
Student on light blue paper to reduce the Student’s eyestrain. (Testimony, Searﬁ; B-17)
Additionally, among other things, the IEP provided 13 hours 0ftutoring in the summer
of 2013 for English, Biology and Algebra; a diagnostic reading assessment in the
summer of 2013; two sets of textbooks per class; and an Occupational Therapy consult
to help with Assistive Technology. (B-17)

At the end of the Student’s 10th grade, the Student obtained the following grades:
Algebra I Honors -79; Art I - 84; Biology Honors - 68; English I Honors - 73; Health
88; Physical Education 11 - 78; Spanish II-H 78. (B—40)

On June 28, 2013, the Bureau of Special Education issued a written response to the
Parents’ April 1, 2013 complaint. The Bureau of Special Education (BSE) directed the
Board to 1) direct the PPT to complete the Multidisciplinary Evaluation Report for
Students Suspected of Having a Speciﬁc Learning Disability form and forward it to the
BSE’s ofﬁce by October 1, 2013; 2) The PPT must forward a copy of the diagnostic
reading assessment repom to BSE no later than October 1, 2013; and 3) The District
must consider the effectiveness of the current program and return to the PPT to discuss
possible changes that align with the recommendations from Dr. Searﬁ’s IEE and further
diagnostic information and forward a copy to BSE no later than October 1, 2013. (B—19
at 24)

9

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

In the middle of August 2013, the Parents provided written notice of their decision to
place Student at Cheshire Academy and requested placement at public expense. The
Parents had Cheshire Academy send the tuition invoice directly to the District. (B-27)
The District denied the Parent’s request for tuition reimbursement and for
transportation services or IRS mileage reimbursement from Southington to Cheshire.
(Stipulation of F acts)

The District attempted to schedule a PPT and informal meetings with Parents during the
summer of 2013. The emails which began with an email conﬁrmation of mailing of a
PPT Notice was returned with an email from Mother conveying dissatisfaction with the
incompetence of Southington staff beginning with the school secretary and mail person
for failing to mail a notice which the secretary had stated was mailed, to discussing the
School’s need to respect the Mother’s gifted/disabled child’s needs. (B-24 at 2)

The PPT was rescheduled for September 13, 2013. The Mother returned the notice
with fax cover sheet by fax to Beth Ozkan, Special Education Coordinator, stating “ I
marked up the errors in the Notice of Planning & Placement Team Meeting to help
you.” The Mother added Janet Rosenbaum of Cheshire Academy as “Agency,
Placement/Program” and eliminated the names of Southington teachers and replaced
the guidance counselor’s name with the name of a Cheshire Academy guidance
counselor. The Mother stated that the PPT should be postponed because a Teacher for
the Visually Impaired would be conducting an assessment of Student. (B—21).

The District attempted several times to convene a PPT before Octobe1'of2013. (B-29)

The PPT convened on December 12, 2013. The following people attended the PPT:
Helen Crowley, Administrator; Lisa Carmody, Special Education Teacher; Candace
Patten, Regular Education Teacher; Lee Ann Miller, Guidance Counselor; Susan
Spatafore, Occupational Therapist; Dr. Perri Murdica and Beth Ozkan, Special
Education Coordinators; Gail Lessard, Special Education Depaitment Chair; and

J onathan Cop, Reading Evaluator. The Mother attended by phone. The PPT was being
conducted in order to comply with BSE’s third corrective directive to convene a PPT to
consider possible changes to the IEP. The PPT reviewed the results of reading
evaluation. The Student had average reading ﬂuency and above average reading rate
and comprehension. The PPT added color overlays. OT consult was increased to one
hour per month. (B-30)

In addition, the PPT reviewed a one-page report the Mother provided from Dr. Phyllis
Liu, an optometrist. Student’s Visual diagnosis changed from Meares—Irlen to a Vision
focusing problem. Dr. Liu indicated that the Student was referred from Dr. Sue
Danberg because Dr. Danberg did not take the family’s medical insurance. Dr. Liu
stated that the Student was nearsighted and with her prescriptive lenses sees 20/20 in
each eye at a distance so the glasses are too strong for near. Student also has difﬁculty
aligning her eyes at near. Dr. Liu prescribed bifocals of -1 .75 on top for both eyes with
1 base prism to help relax Student’s eye with a +1.75 add on the bottom. Dr. Liu
indicated that the Student would be doing visual therapy. Eye health was within normal
limits. Student also focuses up close so the near add will be more relaxing. Dr. Liu
further indicated that the Student’s visual problems qualify her for a Section 504 plan.
She should have more time on tests, notes and assignments from the board and enlarged

10

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

print if needed. Do not have too much on a page since that may be visually confusing.
The accommodations speciﬁed by Doctor Liu and other eye doctors were included in
the Student’s lEPs. Some of the recommendations, such as extended time were already
being implemented. (P-22, B-3, B-ll, B—l4, B—l7, B—30, B-33, B-34, B-38)

Previously, in the summer of 2013, Student saw Dr. Susan Danberg, an optometrist
who prescribed corrective lenses, which prescription was later changed by Dr. Liu. Dr.
Danberg reported that she would recommend additional time to complete assignments
or tests as needed. Additionally, Dr. Danberg recommended Visual therapy. Dr.
Danberg stated that she did not provide the therapy because she was not covered under
the family’s medical insurance. She referred the Student to D1". Liu whom she thought
was covered by the family’s medical insurance. (P-23, P-24).

Student attended Cheshire Academy for the 11‘11 grade. Student presented J acqueline
Sutton, Student’s former history teacher as a witness. Ms. Sutton’s testimony is
summarized as follows: Cheshire Academy provided Student with an Accommodation
Plan. Accommodations included the following: preferential seating; use of
computer/tape recorder; increased font size whenever possible; extended time (time and
a half); distraction free environment; verbally repeat instructions; multisensory
approach; provide visual and auditory models and examples; encourage to write or
underline in text book. The Accommodation Plan did not provide for any specialized
instruction. Cheshire’s special education program was called Roxbury. Student was not
enrolled in the program although the director of the Roxbury program provided Student
with access to Kurzeil, text-to-speech software. (Testimony, Sutton)

Cheshire Academy did not have Student’s Southington Schools IEP. Student was
identiﬁed by Cheshire as a gifted student with a Visual impairment. Janet Rosenbaum
was the Cheshire staff that provided information about Student’s disability to Ms.
Sutton. Ms. Rosenbaum had received information from the Parents. Cheshire
Academy did not provide services for Student’s Speciﬁc Learning Disability. The
Student received accommodations and access to general education teachers. Ms. Sutton
testiﬁed that she did not have personal knowledge that the Student received Visual
Therapy but that the Father told her that the Student had received it. She never saw
anyone administer visual therapy to the Student. (Testimony, Sutton)

The Student obtained a ﬁnal grade of 79 for IE History. Ms. Sutton testiﬁed that the
Student’s mark fell during the latter pait of the school year because she did not hand in
assignments. When the Student failed to hand in the assignments, Ms. Sutton would
remind her that an assignment was due. No specialized plan was in place to help the
Student with organizing her assignments so that they could be timely submitted. If the
Student did not timely tum in an assignment, the Student would receive a penalty for
lateness. (Testimony, Sutton).

Lori Cornelius, a Teacher of the Visually Impaired provided consultation for
accommodations at Cheshire Academy. She suggested the following: “String ensemble
- increase the size of the music and her own music stand would be helpful so she can
move it to the best location for her to see it. Chemistry and Algebra formulas could be
enlarged if they are difﬁcult for [Student] to see. Regarding the glasses would need to

ll

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

39.

40.

41.

42.

be determined by the eye doctor. You should contact them regarding what type of
glasses she should wear.” (P—21)

Cheshire Academy applied for accommodations for college entrance examinations.
The Student was approved by the College Board SAT tests for the following: Record
answers in test book; Small group setting; Extended breaks; Reading +50%; Writing
+50%; Mathematical Calculations +50%. Accommodations were not approved for
Large Print Test Book +14 point and Reader. The College Board stated “There is no
basis to suppmt the need for a reader” and “The standard test scores that were provided
indicate that you have the ability to read on your own. For example, you received
superior to very superior scores in numerous areas of reading (i.e. word identiﬁcation,
word attack, passage comprehension, word comprehension). . .A diagnosis, in and of
itself, does not necessitate testing accommodations without evidence that the disabling
condition leads to functional impairment(s) that would limit your ability to take College
Board tests.” On May 23, 2014, the ACT approved accommodations restricted to a
three-week window of “Use of a reader. Must test individually. Testing staff must read
from the provided Reader’s Script. (P-25)

Student took the SAT in the fall and spring of the 11m grade with the accommodations
that Cheshire Academy procured. The following are her scores out of 800 potential
points: December 7, 2013 — Reading - 550; Math - 560; Writing - 570. March 8, 2014 -
Reading —530; Math 470 - Writing 550. Student took the ACT in June of the 11th grade
while a student at Cheshire Academy. The test was administered with a reader with
extended time. She scored as follows out of 36 potential points: Composite Score 27;
English — 28 (Usage 14; Rhetorical skills —15); Mathematics - 23 (subtest scores range
between 1 to 18 - Pre-AIgebra/Elementary Algebra — 14; Algebra/Coordinate Geometry
—1 1; Plane Geometry/Trigonometry- 11); Reading — 30 (Social Studies/Sciences -16,
Arts/Literature -16); Science - 25; Combined English/Writing 26 (Writing score range 2
to 12) — 8) (P—18)

At the end of the 11th grade, Student received the following marks from Cheshire
Academy: Algebra II - 82; Anatomy and Physiology -76; Health - P; IE English
Language and Literature - 82; IB French - 82; IB History of Americas -79; IB Visual
Arts -89; Physical Education - P; String Ensemble - 96. (B- 40)

A PPT convened an August 25, 2014, The pulpose of the PPT was to propose FAPE
for the Student’s 12‘h grade year. The Parental input included a statement that [Student]
needs an additional Biology class, preferably AP, to improve opportunities to get into
an Ivy League college.” Prior to the PPT, Beth Ozkan, Coordinator of Special
Education contacted Lori Cornelius and J anet Rosenbaum of Cheshire Academy at
Parent request to plan for the PPT. Ms. Ozkan testiﬁed that she interviewed Lori
Cornelius, a Teacher of the Visually Impaired and an employee of the Bureau of
Education and Services for the Blind, whether Student qualiﬁed under the category of
Visual Impairment and Ms. Cornelius indicated that the Student did not qualify. Ms.
Ozkan also interviewed J anet Rosenbaum about Student’s Accommodation Plan at
Cheshire Academy and was told by Ms. Rosenbaum that Student did not receive any
specialized instruction. Ms. Ozkan testiﬁed that Ms. Rosenbaum offered to meet with
the Student on Mondays but the Student did not take advantage of the services. The
Student denies this and testiﬁed that she had meetings twice a week. Nevertheless,

12

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

43.

44.

45.

46.

whether the meeting took place, it is undisputed from testimony that whatever did or
did not happen with Ms. Rosenbaum would not be considered “specialized instruction”
under the IDEA. (B-53; Testimony, Ozkan; Testimony, Student)

The Parents proposed that the Student’s category ofprimary disability be changed to
Visual Impairment. The PPT denied this request. The PPT recommended the
following, among other things - that the Student would apply for continued
accommodations, including readers, for the SAT and ACT; that the Student would be
allowed to take assessments at an alternate setting per her request; that the Student
would have one hour per month Occupational Therapy consultation as needed; the
teaching staff would design and implement a technology plan to support her learning
and task completion; copies of PowerPoint presentations would be given to Student
before class; Teachers would give Student written expectations to Student whenever
possible. Daily Academic Support classes were offered but refused by the Student and
Parents. (B-33, Testimony, Ozkan).

The PPT reconvened on December 16, 2015 to review the Student’s progress. In
attendance were: Brian Straieri, Administrator; Father; Mother; Student; Beth Hosner,
Regular Education Teacher; Stacey Haber, Special Education Teacher; Lee Ann Miller,
Guidance Counselor; Susan Spatafore, Occupational Therapist; Dale Riedinger, Math
Coordinator; Margaret Walsh, Senior Special Education Coordinator; and a family
friend. The PPT added daily reading ﬂuency instruction. (B-44)

The purpose of the reading ﬂuency instruction was to increase the Student’s
comprehension while having Student read quicker. The program used 8‘h grade content
to increase the number of words the Student could read in a minute. At the beginning
of the program, the Student could read 170 words in an initial reading of a passage in
timed conditions. In her last reading, she was able to read 230 words in an initial
reading, thus improving her ﬂuency and her comprehension. The Student was required
to attempt to read the passages and then quizzed on the story the Student read.
(Testimony, Haber, B-52)

On February 26, 2015, the Parents ﬁled a second complaint with BSE. Many of the
Complaints were about the 10th grade school year and outside the scope of BSE’s one-
year look back period under Connecticut regulations. The complaint claimed that the
District did not uphold certain promises. The complaint alleged that the District
promised to provide transportation from the Student’s home on the regular school bus;
that the District did not honor premises by District staff to “match all services and
programming that Cheshire Academy provided”; that the District was obligated to take
the Student on campus Visits, provide her with research assistant experience or help her
write a college essay; that the District staff was harassing Student. BSE declined to
investigate these claims as they were outside the scope of the IDEA. The Parents also
made claims that the District did not hold a facilitated PPT meeting as required by
BSE’s prior investigation; that the District was not allowing Student to pursue extra
curricular activities; that the District was not providing needed program modiﬁcations
to address the Student’s visual impairment; and that the District failed to comply with
IDEA requirements to evaluate Student in all areas of suspected disability by not
considering visual impairment. (P—12) The investigator reviewed the record and
outlined the discussion of visual impairment and noted that no actions requested of the

13

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

47.

48.

49.

District by the Parents were denied. The investigator found no need for corrective
action. (P-13) During the hearing, the Mother testiﬁed that that she believed that the
BSE investigator did not ﬁnd a need for corrective action because BSE was in collusion
with Dr. Perri Murdica and Southington Schools. (Testimony, Mother).

Indeed, it is clear from the record that the family had developed an internal nan'ative
that the Southington school staff was working to deprive the Student of FAPE. For
instance, an email between the Parents discussed a response to a Parent request to
provide teacher recommendations to a MEDscience summer program and an Aetna
HIPPI summer program. The Superintendent responded because Parents had sent
numerous emails to a variety of school staff in the previous 24—hour period. The
Superintendent in his email outlined an update on all issues. With regard to the
summer program he stated that “Dr. Semmel is prepared to update you on the Aetna
and Harvard Program.” Upon receiving this email, the Mother emailed the Father
stating “What are they doing??? See how u never mentioned Haward but he knows
about it???? Seems semmel [principal] and erardi [superintendent] are in collusion to
sabatoge [Student’s] oppmtunities. Need to email Marcus Rivera [BSE consultant] for
help!!!” (P-33 at 8)

The Student testiﬁed about the nature of her disabilityi She testiﬁed that she had trouble
with reading comprehension and understanding concepts of biology. She testiﬁed that
the fast pace and pressure gave her much stress and that the more pressure she felt, the
worse she would do. She testiﬁed that while at Cheshire Academy, general education
teachers were accessible to her and she would receive additional tutoring for academic
areas that she did not understand. She would be able to go to school early to get extra
help from a teacher whereas general education teachers at Southington High School
were not always accessible. She testiﬁed that on the second day of classes in senior
year, her Special Education case manager, Stacey Haber, came to the lunchroom and
yelled at her because she should have been in class. Student testiﬁed that Ms Haber
embarrassed Student in front of other Students. Student testiﬁed that the Ms. Haber
suggested that she not take so many honors level courses and this made Student feel
Ms. Haber was saying she was “stupid”. Student felt that the teacher was
unprofessional and asked to change teachers. Student testiﬁed that she recorded these
comments and played the recording at a PPT and then revised her testimony that she
made notes of the statements and showed them to the PPT. She stated that Ms. Haber
did apologize once for her behavior suggesting that Ms. Haber knew that she was
wrong. The Student also testiﬁed that she received Visual therapy at Cheshire Academy
from a sports therapist that she could not name. (Testimony, Student)

The Student took SAT and ACT college entrance examinations while a Senior at
Southington High School. The District asked the College Board to revisit the
accommodation of a reader but the request was denied. The Student’s SAT scores for
October 11, 2014 were as follows: Reading - 580; Math — 530; Writing — 620. It is
signiﬁcant to note that these were the highest test scores that the Student obtained.
While the Student scored 560 in Math during December of her 10'h grade year at
Cheshire Academy, the senior year math score was not signiﬁcantly lower whereas the
junior year Math score fell by 90 points. (P—18) Student took the ACTS at the

14

 

April 19, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16—0115

50.

51.

52.

53.

Southington High School test center site. The score was invalidated by the ACT when
the test center staff (also a Southington School teacher) exceeded the time limits. (P-6)

The Student graduated from Southington High School and matriculated at University of
Connecticut. Her ﬁnal grades for the 12”1 grade were as follows: British Literature I -
81; Chemistiy Honors -76; Health IV - 100; Humanities (coIlege prep)- 82;
Intermediate Algebra (college prep) -82 AUD; Intro to Psychology (competitive college
prep) -96; IS: Government -94; Physical Education - 90. (B-40)

Student applied for and was accepted at the following colleges: UConn; University of
New England; Trinity College; University of Saint Joseph. Student was denied
admission to the following colleges: Bucknell University; University; Dartmouth
College; Haivai‘d University; Vassar College and Wesleyan University. It is interesting
to note that Student withdrew her application from her ﬁrst choice college, Fashion
Institute of Technology, which is a competitive college of art that is neither an Ivy
League school nor a competitive liberal aits college. (B-49)

The Student executed a Power of Attorney to the Parents to represent her in the hearing.
However, Student was able to represent herself at the February 19 hearing date without
her mother. Student appeared organized, methodical, calm and poised. (Transcript,
February 19, 2016)

On May 6, 2015, Student completed a Summary of Performance Student Perspective.
In answer to the question: “What strengths and needs should professionals know about
you as you enter the college or work environment?” Student answered as follows: “1am
EXTREMELY conscioncious (sic) and serious student who always works to my full
ability, of which is a very gifted one. My disabiligy is stress—induced, so guilting,
pressuring, and disciplining me about assignments will actually worsen my problems
and not help. 1 am NOT a disciplinary issue and I pressure myself to do the best thatI
can possibly can and do not accept any less. 1 am a strong paiticipator, and have great
self—advocacy.” (emphasis added B-39)

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DISCUSSION:

1.

There is no dispute that Student is eligible to receive a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) and related services as set forth in the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C Sec 1401, et seq. and its implementing regulations
codiﬁed at 34 CFR §300 et. Seq., and under Conn. Gen. Stat. Sec. 10-76.

The purpose of the IDEA is to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to
them FAPE that emphasizes “special education and related services designed to meet
their unique needs” and “prepare them for further education, employment and
independent living” and “to ensure that the rights of children with disabilities and
parents of such children are protected .V” 20 U.S.C. §l400(d)(l).

The Act deﬁnes FAPE as special education and related services which “(A) have been
provided at public expense, under public supervision and direction, and without charge;
(B) meet the standards of the State Educational Agency; (C) include an appropriate
preschool, elementary, or secondary school education in the State involved; and (D) are

15

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

provided in conformity with the individualized education program required under Sec.
614(d).” 20 U.S.C. §1401 (8).

4. In Board ofEducation v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176 (1982), the United State Supreme
Court explained that “Congress did not intend the IDEA to guarantee a speciﬁc
outcome, but to provide a basic level of educational oppmtunity for students with
disabilities. A school district is not obligated to maximize the disabled student’s
potential.” Rowley, 458 U.S. at 192, quoting S. Rep. No. 94-168, at 11. The IDEA only
requires "the door of public education [to] be opened for a disabled child in a
"meaningful‘ way." Walczak 142 F.3d at 130, citing Board ofEducation of the
Hendrick Hudson Central School District v Rowley, 458 U S 176(1982). However, it
does not guarantee "everything that might be thought desirable by loving parents." Id.
at 132.

5. The IDEA does not mandate that Southington provide a special education program that
guarantees As and Bs in honors classes or acceptance to a highly competitive school.
The IDEA only requires that the Board provide a basic level of education to prepare
Student for college. The Student took honors classes in high school; graduated and is
attending college in accordance with her transition plan. The Southington Board has
provided Student with a free and appropriate public education under the analysis set
forth by the United States Supreme Couit. See Rowley, 458 U.S. at 192. (Finding of
Fact No. 49)

6. The subject matter jurisdiction of IDEA due process hearings and impaitial hearing
ofﬁcers is deﬁned under state and federal law. The IDEA states that impartial hearing
ofﬁcers and due process hearings axe to decide issues outlined in 20 U.S.C.
§1415(b)(6)(A) or (10'. 20 U.S.C. §1415(b)(6)(A) deﬁnes the subject matter as
“matter[s] relating to the identification, evaluation, or educational placement of the
child, or the provision of a free appropriate public education to such child”. 20 U.S.C.
§1415(b)(6)(A) andsee also, 20 USC. §141509(1}(A). The hearings are a means of
resolving complaints when an LEA either "(11) proposes to initiate or change; or (B)
refuses to initiate or change, the identification, evaluation, or educationalplacemeht of
the child, or the provision afafree appropriate public education to the child. ” 20
U.S.C. §1415(b)(7)(A)(III).

7. §10-76h of the Connecticut General Statutes conﬁnes the jurisdiction of Hearing
Ofﬁcers to conﬁrming, modifying or rejecting the identiﬁcation, evaluation 01'
educational placement of 01‘ the provision of FAPE to a child, to determining the
appropriateness of a unilateral placement of a child or to prescribing alternative special
education programs for a child.

8. Many of the allegations involve conduct outside of the scope of the hearing and
authority of the Hearing Ofﬁcer. The Hearing Ofﬁcer lacks authority to detennine the
following issues:

' Due Process Hearing Ofﬁcers also have jurisdiction to decide issues involving alternative
educational settings under 20 U.S.C. §1415(k). The present Due Process C0mp1aint does
not raise any issues relating to alternative educational settings and thus, no discussion is
required.

16

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—01 15

A. Retaliation by the Board ’3 Superintendent The Parents ongoing dispute with the
Superintendent is outside the scope of the IDEA. The motivation of the
Superintendent is not relevant to this hearing. However, the IDEA mandates the
provision of FAPE to Students and the result of any retaliation can be
considered as violations of FAPE under IDEA.

B. Failure to Provide a Certiﬁed Teacher for Spanish in the 10”1 grade This issue
involves the general education curriculum and is both outside the scope of this
hearing and outside the period of statute of limitations. See R.C.S.A Sec. 10—
76h-4(a)

C. Failure to F ulﬁll Promises Made at a Resolution Meeting Resolution
Agreements subject to the Resolution process are described in 34 CFR §510
must be determined by State or Federal courts, not Hearing Ofﬁcers.

9, Tuming t0 the issues within the jurisdiction of the IDEA and authority of the Hearing
Ofﬁcer. These issues will be considered in light of the evidence. The party who ﬁled
for due process (Parents) has the burden of going forward with evidence. The Board has
the burden of proving the appropriateness of the child’s program or placement. This
burden shall be met by a preponderance of the evidence. R.C.S.A. Sec. 10-76h—14. The
Parents not produced evidence to substantiate the following allegations:

A. Bullying by Board Staff “Bullying is characterized by aggression used within a
relationship where the aggressor(s) has more real or perceived power than the
target, and the aggression is repeated, 01‘ has the potential to be repeated, over
time. Bullying can involve overt physical behavior or verbal, emotional, or
social behaviors (e.g., excluding someone from social activities, making threats,
withdrawing attention, destroying someone's reputation) and can range from
blatant aggression to far more subtle and covert behaviors.” Dear Colleague
Letter, 61 IDEIR 263 (OSERS/OSEP 2013). Student’s description of behavior
of Stacy Haber, Special Education Teacher, even if tme, does not meet the
deﬁnition of bullying. (Findings of F act N0. 47)

B. Inapgrogriate Reading Program: In her closing argument, Mother stated that
State Department of Education mandated that the Board provide Student with a
reading program. The Parents Were emphatic about this even though the
evidence does not support this contention. (Transcript, April 8, 2016; Findings
ofFact No. 28)

C. Compliance with FERPA and interﬁarence with the PPT: The Parents and
Student brought forward no evidence concerning this topic. In fact, this issue
was raised for the ﬁrst time in the Parents’ closing argument. (Transcript, April
8, 2016)

D. Failure to Assist Cheshire Academy with Accommodation Plan: R.C.S.A Sec.
10—76d-6 states that “[s]pecial education and related services available for
parentally placed private school children eligible for special education shall be
provided in accordance with the IDEA.” Under the IDEA, “[p]a1'entally placed
children do not have an individual entitlement to any or all services that the
children would receive if enrolled in public schooli See Questions and Answers

17

 

April l9, 20 l 6 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

017 Serving Children with Disabilities Placed by Their Parents in Private
Schools, 111 LRP 32532 (OSERS, April 1, 2011).

10. The Board has met its burden with regard to the remaining issues:

A. F ailure to Consider Medical Diagnosis: The mandate in the IDEA that the IEP
team “considers” the concerns of the Parents does not require that it adopt
whatever changes Parents request. 34 CFR. §300.346(a)(i). The record reveals
that the Board considered the concerns of Parents. While it is true that the
Board did not change the Student’s primaiy category of disability to Visual
Impairment, the Board did follow the recommendations of all medical providers
and optometrists. The recommendations of these providers were to provide
accommodations. Some of these accommodations were already included in
Student’s IEPS. (Finding of F act N0. 34 and 35)

B. Failure to Offer an IEP for the 11”1 Grade. 34 C.F.R. Sec. 300.323(a) provides
that “[a]t the beginning of each school year, each public agency must have in
effect, for each child with a disability within its jurisdiction, an IEP, as deﬁned
in Sec. 300.320.” The Board complied with this requirement when it convened a
PPT in June 0f2013 and created an IEP for the Student’s ll‘h grade school year.
(Finding of Fact No. 26)

C. Failure to Provide Appropriate Technology. The IDEA requires each public
agency to ensure that AT devices and services are made available to each child
with a disability if required as part of the child's special education, related
services, or supplementary aids and services. 34 CFR 300.105 (a). Districts are
required to provide Assistive Technology devices and services if the
participants on the student’s team determine that the student needs such a device
to receive F APE. Letter to Anonymous,_24 lDELR 854 (OSEP 1996). The
Board complied with their obligation by considering the assistive technology
recommendations of Dr. Scarﬁ, which included Bookshare. The Board
conducted an Assistive Technology review, provided Student with access to a
laptop and other technologies and provided OT consult services. (Findings of
Fact N0. 25 and 26)

D. Inadequate Medical Support for a Medically Diagnosed Eve Condition. The
Student contends that the District did not provide FAPE because it did not
change the Student’s primary disability to the category of “Visual Impairment”
and did not provide Student with Vision Therapy. Under 34 CFR §
300.8(c)(l3), "Visual impairment including blindness" means an impairment in
vision that, even with correction, adversely affects a child's educational
performance. The term includes both partial sight and blindness. The child's
educational performance, the determination of Visual impairment should be
determined by gathering data in each individual case. Letter to Kotler, 115 LRP
ﬂmSEP 1 1/ 12/ 14) Lori Cornelius, a Teacher of the Visually Impaired
from the Bureau of Education and Services for the Blind advised Ms. Ozkan
that the Student did not qualiﬁed as a Student under the disability category of
Visual Impairment. Ms. Cornelius, whose agency would be the agency to
gather data to make such determination, stated that the Student did not qualify.

18

 

April 19, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0115

Regardless of whether the Student qualiﬁed as a student with Visual
Impairment, the Board’s obligation to provide FAPE required the Board to meet
the unique needs of the Student, including vision concerns. The Board
complied with this requirement. (Finding of F act No. 26) F inally, the Parents
and Student contend that the Board should provide medical sewices in the form
of visual therapy. The evidence does not support a ﬁnding that medical
providers provided the Board with a prescription for visual therapy. The
optometrists’ note speciﬁcally stated that the therapy was to be provided by
other optometrists who would take the Student’s medical insurance. (Finding of
Fact No. 34 and 35). Medical services are required under the IDEA t0 the
extent that they are necessary for diagnostic purposes. The services of licensed
physicians for other purposes, speciﬁcally for treatment, are not related services
under the IDEA. See Cedar Rapids ley. Sch. Dist. 1/. Garret F.,_29 IDELR 966
(US. 1999); and Mary Courtney T. v. School Dist. afPhiladelphia, 52 IDELR
211 (3d Cir. 2009)

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

1.

2.

The Board offered FAPE in the two years prior to the ﬁling of the Due Process
Complaint.

Since the Board provided FAPE for the two years prior to the ﬁling of the Due
Process Complaint, it is not necessary to decide issues 2 and 3 above.

19

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special educatiOn for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereofj the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescn'ption of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
count by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

)égwm

Hgarmgbfﬁcer Signature

S Ilvia Ho
' Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04 '

 

