August 24, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0070

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Avon Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecca Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, Connecticut 06103—1919

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Are the Neurological, Speech and Language and Reading Evaluations conducted by
the Board appropriate? If not;
2. Should the Board conduct an Independent Reading Evaluation at public expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate
public education (FAPE) as deﬁned in The Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement
Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a
planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rejected the reading evaluation
conducted by the Board. The Parents requested an independent reading evaluation. The Board
refused the Parents’ request. The Board ﬁled for due process in compliance with 34 C.F.R. §
300.502(b).

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on Ju1y 31, 2015 and a pre-hearing conference was
scheduled for August 7, 2015. In an electronic transmission, the Board advised the hearing
ofﬁcer that the Parents had withdrawn their request for an independent reading evaluation. The
Board withdrew their request for due process without prejudice.

The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is October 14, 2015.

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereqf, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the

ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the healing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

   

Hearing DfEEESi’guamre

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigz1page.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

