April 28, 2016 Final Decision and Order Case No. 16-0355

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Connecticut Technical High School System Board of Education v. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine L. Chinni
Chinni & Meuser LLC
30 Avon Meadow Lane

Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

Does the Connecticut Technical High School have to maintain the Student in its program, if the
Student requires special education and related services which cannot be provided at the
Technical High School and the Parent declines the services?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education
(F APE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20
U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents refused to provide consent for
special education and related services for the Student. The Parents requested that the Student
remain in the Connecticut Technical High School System (CTHSS) even though the CTHSS
PPT said they could not provide him with an appropriate program within the CTHSS. The Board
refused the Parents’ request and ﬁled for a due process hearing. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was
appointed on February 23, 2016 and a pre-hearing conference was held on Februaly 26, 2016.

On March 31, 2016, the Board’s attomey informed the hearing ofﬁcer that they were able to
resolve the matter and the Board’s attorney withdrew the due process request.

The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order was extended in order to accommodate
mediation of the matter. The mailing date for the Final Decision and Order is May 8, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title'ZO, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

7h «1.; . ""\

 

Hearing?) JMW/

  

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

