December 15, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0235

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student1 V. Bridgeport Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of Student: Student’s Mother, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Gwen Zittoun
Shipman & Goodwin
One Constitution Plaza

Haitford, CT 06103 -1919

Appearing before: Janis C. Jerman
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

A special education hearing in the above—captioned matter was requested by Student’s Mother
Via Request for Impartial Special Education Hearing dated November 5, 2015.2 It was received
by the Board of Education (“BOE”) on November 6. The 30-day resolution period ended
December 6 and the deadline to mail the ﬁnal decision and order is January 20, 2016.

A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on November 16. On that date, Student’s Parents
and Student’s Advocate appeared on behalf of Student. No one appeared on behalf of BOE. A
pre-hearing conference was rescheduled for November 25. On that date, Student’s Parents and
Student’s Advocate appeared on behalf of Student and Attorney Zittoun appeared on behalf of
BOE.

ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education provide Student with appropriate transition services?
2. 1f the answer to Issue One is in the negative, what shall be the remedy?

Hearing was scheduled for December 17. The parties participated in mediation on November 30.
Via e-mail dated November 30, Student’s Mother indicated that she was withdrawing the request
for hearing based on the agreement of the parties.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

In light of the above facts, the above-captioned case is dismissed.

l In order to comply with the conﬁdentiality requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of
1974, 20 U.S.C‘ § 1232g (“FERPA”) and related regulations at 34 CFR § 99, this decision uses “Student” and
“Student’s Mother” in place of names and other personally identiﬁable information.

2 All dates are 2015 unless otherwise indicated.

 

1
‘ .1

' Ifthe local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school distdct responsible for
' ,"Eroyi'ding Spccial education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁﬁccn days aﬁar ‘
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take approprigte action to enforce the

ﬁndings or- prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

4 Appeals ﬁom the hearing decision of the healing ofﬁcer may bemade to stats 01' federal
court by either party in accprdznce with the provisicins ofScction 4-183, Connecticut
Gcngral Statutcs, and Title 20 United Statcs'Codc 1415(i)(2)(A)..

 

ésarin armg Ofﬁcer Signature

CYPN 1'5 c. Q&"Aw‘w

. Heéﬁng Ofﬁcer Name in Print .

signpagc. doc (ho disk)
4/1/04. ’

 

