April 6, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0434

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. Danbury Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Cheryl Kohler
Connecticut Legal Services
85 Central Avenue
Waterbury, CT 06702

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecca Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
100 Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Did the District fail to refer Student to a Planning and Placement Team meeting for a
special education evaluation?

2. Did the District fail to evaluate Student in all areas of suspected disability?

3. Did the District fail to provide Parents notice of Student’s procedural safeguards in a
language in which they were ﬂuent?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On March 28, 2016, Attorney for the Parent ﬁled a letter with the Connecticut State Department
of Education (“CSDE”). This letter alleged three violations of Student’s procedural safeguards
which are set forth above. Believing the letter to be a request for a due process hearing, the
CSDE appointed the undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer on March 30, 2016. On April 1, 2016,
Attorney for the Parent notiﬁed the CSDE by email that the document which she had ﬁled was in
fact a complaint and not a request for a due process hearing. This email was forwarded to the
undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer on April 4, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed without prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer. ‘

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

”Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

BVat'Fé H FHOV}

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

