July 28, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 16—0540

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Ridgeﬁeld Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attomey Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Were the Psycho—Educational Evaluation and the Educational Evaluation performed by the
Board appropriate? If not;

2. Is the Student entitled to an Independent Psycho-Educational and Educational Evaluations at
public expense?

SUMMARY and PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education
(FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20
U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents disagreed with the evaluations
perfoxmed by the Board. The Parents requested Independent Psycho—Educational and
Educational Evaluations. The Board refused the Parents’ request and ﬁled for due process. An
impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on May 24, 2016 and a pre—hearing conference was held
on June 3, 2016.

In an electronic transmission, the Parents advised the hearing ofﬁcer that they were withdrawing
the request for independent educational evaluations. Based on the Parents’ withdrawal, the

Board withdrew its request for a due process hearing.

The date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order was extended in order to accommodate
the scheduling of hearing dates. The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is July 29,
2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED.

 

If the local or regional board of education 01‘ the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiling special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the healing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

earingb‘fﬁceis‘imgtqre/

Justino Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

