June 13, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16—0511

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Wethersﬁeld Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Peter Maher
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Haitford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the psychological and psychiatric evaluations performed by the Board
appropriate? If not;

2. Should the Board conduct Independent Psychological and Psychiatric Evaluations of
the Student at public expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Emotional Disturbance and is entit1ed to receive FAPE as
deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C.
§1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10—76a et seq. At a planning and placement
team (PPT) meeting, the Parents were not in agreement with the psychological and psychiatric
evaluations performed by the Board and requested independent evaluations at public expense.
The Board refused the Palents’ request and ﬁled for a due process hearing.

An impaitial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on May 6, 2016 and a pre—hearing conference was
held on May 18, 2016. The parties agreed to a mediation session. The date of the mediation
session was pending. In an electronic transmission the Board’s attorney advised the hearing
ofﬁcer that the Parents were withdrawing their request for independent evaluations. Based on the
Parents’ representation, the Board withdrew their request for due process without prejudice.

The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is June 17, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

