November 10, 2015 Final Decision and Order 16-0122

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and West Hartford Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Susan Freedman
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents, Pro Se
Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:
1. Is the Board of Education’s evaluation of the Student appropriate?
2. If not, is the Student entitled to an Independent Educational Evaluation at public

expense and/or compensatory education services?
PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter
on September 2, 2015. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to the case on the same
day. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was held on October 13, 2015. Attorney Susan
Freedman appeared on behalf of the Board of Education and reported that the matter had been
settled. On October 14, 2015, the Parent conﬁrmed that the matter had been resolved and
requested that the matter be dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the request of the Student for dismissal is granted and this matter is
dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action 011 the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal

court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@Fw

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

,4wa §th

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupagedoe (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

