February 1, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0321

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

East Hartford Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin LLP

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

F INAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

 

Is the Board of Education’s evaluation of the Student appropriate?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board of Education requested a special education due process hearing in the above—
captioned matter on J anuary 25, 2016, in order to prove that its’ evaluation of the Student is
appropriate. This request was made in response to the Parent’s request for an independent
educational evaluation at public expense. The Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to
hear and decide the case on J anuary 25, 2016. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was
scheduled for F ebruary 1, 2016.

On J anuary 29, 2016, the Board of Education reported that the Parent withdrew her request for

an independent educational evaluation and that, accordingly, the Board of Education
requested dismissal of its request for due process without prejudice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board of Education’s request for dismissal is granted and this matter is
dismissed without prejudice.

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@F/ip/

Hearing OfﬁEEI Signature

[499“) F EMU)

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

