August 10, 2016 Final Decision and Order 16-0636

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Glastonbury Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Leander Dolphin
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1‘ Were the evaluations performed by the Board appropriate? If not;
2. Should the Board conduct an Independent Speech and Language Evaluation of the
Student at public expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has not been identiﬁed as eligible to receive a free and appropriate public education
and related sewices (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et
seq. At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents were not in agreement with
the evaluations performed by the Board and requested an independent speech and language
evaluation at public expense. The Board refused the Parents’ request and ﬁled for a due process
hearing.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on June 27, 2016 and a pre-hearing conference was
held on July 6, 2016. The parties agreed to mediation; the date of the mediation was pending.

In an electronic transmission the Board’s attorney advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the Parents
were withdrawing their request for an independent evaluation. Based on the Parents’
representation, the Board withdrew their request for due process. The date for mailing the Final
Decision and Order is August 11, 2016.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
cowt by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

    
 

Hearing‘Ofﬁc’érTsmggl-p/

Justine Rosado
Healing Ofﬁcer Name in Flint

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

