September 8, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17—0034

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and Hebron Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Patricia Cofrancesco
Law Ofﬁce of Patricia Cofrancesco
89 Kimberly Avenue
East Haven, CT 06512

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Attorney Julie Fay
Shipman & Goodwin LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Haltford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the Board of Education violate the Student’s rights under IDEA as a result of the
incident of May 13, 2016?
2. If so, should the Student be placed in another school?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter
on July 19, 2016. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on July 20,
2016. A telephonic pre-hearing conference was convened on August 5, 2016. Attorney
Patricia Coﬁ'ancesco appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Alyce Alfano appeared
on behalf of the Hebron Board of Education (Board). The deadline for issuing the ﬁnal
decision and order was established to be September 30, 2016. An evidentiary hearing was
scheduled for September 20, 2016. Finally, a schedule was established for submissions
relating to the Board of Education’s anticipated motion to dismiss the request for due process.

The Board ﬁled a Motion to Dismiss the request for special education due process hearing on
August 22, 2016. The Student ﬁled an Objection to the Board’s Motion to Dismiss and a
Motion to Disqualify Attorney Julie Fay and Shipman & Goodwin from the case on
September 6, 2016.

MOTION TO DISMISS:
The Board’s Motion to Dismiss attacks the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s subject matter jurisdiction over

this request for due process. The Board argues that the request for due process does not allege
a claim over which the Hearing Ofﬁcer has jurisdiction because it does not challenge the

 

September 8, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0034

identiﬁcation, evaluation, placement or provision of a free appropriate public education for the
Student. To the contrary, the Board argues, the claim amounts to an alleged violation of the

F amily Educational Rights and Privacy Act, 20 U.S.C. Section 1232g (FERPA), a law over
which this Hearing Ofﬁcer has no authority.

The Student disputes these arguments, claiming that the matter is one over which the Hearing
Ofﬁcer has jurisdiction.

The allegations of the request for due process are deemed true for the purpose of this analysis.

The request for due process alleges, in pertinent part, that on May 13, 2016, the school nurse
took the Student into a room, removed his clothes and photographed him with her cell phone
camera. The nurse then sent the photograph to the “school district’s physician” by text
message. This was done without the consent or knowledge of the parent. As a remedy, the
request for due process asks that the Board provide an alternative placement in a safe
educational setting for the Student.

As a due process hearing ofﬁcer, I have jurisdiction over the identiﬁcation, evaluation or
placement of a student or the provision of a free appropriate public education for a student.
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 76h(a); Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies,
Section 10-76h—3.

Even if they are assumed to be true, the allegations of the request for due process in this case
do not involve the identiﬁcation, evaluation or placement of the Student or the provision of a
free appropriate public education for the Student. There is no suggestion in either the request
for due process 01' the Student’s Objection to the Motion to Dismiss, for instance, that the
nurse’ conduct was mandated in, or prohibited by, the Student’s individualized education
program. Nor is there any allegation that the incident took place as pait of an evaluation
requested by the Student’s planning and placement team. Accordingly, even if the nurse was
motivated by the most nefarious reasons, her behavior falls outside of the scope of my
jurisdiction.

The Board also argues that the matter should be dismissed because the proposed remedy —
placement in another public school system - is also outside the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s jurisdiction.
The Board’s argument here, however, reads the remedy requested too narrowly. The Student
actually requests only that he be provided an alternative placement, something that is within
the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s authority. Connecticut General Statutes, Section 10—76h(d).

For the foregoing reasons, the Board’s Motion to Dismiss is granted. The Motion to
Disqualify need not be reached.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board’s Motion to Dismiss is granted and this matter is dismissed.

 

If the local 01‘ regional board of education 01' the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings 01' prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcér may be made to state 01' federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

% Fti/

Hearing thc/er Signature

6.1.

4w FEIRD

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 ,

 

