February 21, 2017 Final Decision and Order 17-0278

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Cromwell Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: , Attorney Alyce Alfano
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1 . Did the District commit a procedural Violation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act (“IDEA”) by failing to have Mother participate in the Flaming and Placement Team
(“PPT”) meeting on December 16, 2016 at which the manifestation determination was made? If
the Board committed this procedural Violation of the IDEA, did such Violation operate to deny
Student a F ree Appropriate Public Education?

2. Is District’s proposed Individualized Education Program with placement at the Woodland
School, which was discussed at the November 23, 2016 PPT meeting and recommended at the
December 16, 2016 PPT meeting, appropriate? If the placement is not appropriate, what is the
appropriate program?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On December 19, 2017, the Board received a request for a special education due process hearing ﬁled
by Parent. The Connecticut State Department of Education (“CDSE”) appointed the undersigned
Hearing Ofﬁcer to preside over the matter on December 21, 2017. The case was originally assigned as
an expedited matter by the CSDE. Subsequent correspondence between the Hearing Ofﬁcer and the
Parties established that Parent did not disagree with the determination of the Planning and Placement
Team at the manifestation determination meeting, but rather Parent disagreed with the placement
proposed by the District and the District’s holding of the manifestation determination meeting in her
absence. Given this information and written conﬁrmation from Parent that she was not seeking an
expedited hearing, the case was processed as a non—expedited matter. During the prehearing conference
held on J anuary 20, 2017, March 24, 2017 was set as the hearing date, the deadline for mailing the
Final Decision and Order was established as March 3, 2017. In response to discussion of the Board’s
challenges to the sufﬁciency of the request, Parent was given the opportunity to amend her hearing
request, which she did on J anuary 23, 2017. The ﬁling of this amended complaint restarted the
deadline for mailing the ﬁnal decision and order and resulted in a new mailing deadline of April 7,
2017. On February 14, 2017, Parent withdrew her request for a due process hearing.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for .
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educatidn shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the‘hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

jjﬂi 1/]. #77 ﬁght

/Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

B/mLhi H. ?HD iq

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

