February 2, 2017 Final Decision and Order 17-0276

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Stratford Board of Education V. Student

Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Attorney Nora Belanger
Law Ofﬁces of Nora Belanger, LLC
161 East Avenue, Ste. 104 E
Norwalk, CT 06510

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Sullivan
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, Ct 06460

Appearing before: Justino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:
Should the Board be allowed to evaluate the Student without the Parents’ consent?
SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:
The Student is classiﬁed With Autism and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate public
education (FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act
(IDEA) 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.
At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents would not provide consent for the
Board to evaluate the Student. The Board ﬁled for due process requesting permission to perform
evaluations as requested at the PPT, without the Parents’ consent.
Notice of the hearing request was received by the Board on December 20, 2016. An impa1tia1
hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on December 21 , 2016 and a pre—hearing conference was
scheduled for J anuary 4, 2017.
In an electronic transmission the Board advised the hearing ofﬁcer that the Parents had signed
the consent form for the evaluations and withdrew their request for due process with prejudice.
The date for the mailing the F inal Decision and Order is February 3, 2017.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

