August 17, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0062

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Enﬁeld Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni & Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. F itton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Was the evaluation conducted by the District appropriate, thereby relieving the District of the
obligation to provide an Independent Educational Evaluation of Student at public expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On July 29, 2016, Parent received a request for a special due process hearing ﬁled by the Enﬁeld
Board of Education. On August 3, 2016, the Connecticut State Department of Education
(“CSDOE”) appointed this Hearing Ofﬁcer to preside over the case. On August 5, 2016, the
Attorney for the Board sent the CSDOE an email indicating that the Board was withdrawing its
request for a hearing, because Parent had withdrawn Parent’s request for an Independent
Educational Evaluation. The withdrawal of the request for a hearing was forwarded to the
undersigned hearing ofﬁcer. The deadline for mailing the ﬁnal decision and order is September
12, 2016. As the withdrawal of the healing request occurred shortly after the hearing was
assigned, no preheating conference was held.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for ‘
providing special education for the student requirir‘ig special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educatien shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the'hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

5/% M/é ,

“Hearing Ofﬁcei Signatuxe

Bath”, H t 73% h

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

sigupagedcc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

