February 23, 2017 Final Decision and Order 17-0198

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. CTHSS Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Christine Chinni
Chinni and Meuser, LLC
One Darling Drive
Avon, CT 06001

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:
1. Did the District err when it refused to permit Student to enroll in A.I. Prince Technical School on
the basis of her disability?
2. Should Student’s program be implemented in Al. Prince Technical School?
3. Is Student entitled to compensatory education?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On October 25, 2016, the Board received a special education due process hearing request ﬁled by Parent
and the Connecticut State Department of Education appointed this Hearing Ofﬁcer. During the prehearing
conference held on December 9, 2016, a hearing date of J anuary 27, 2017 was set and the deadline for
mailing the Final Decision and order was established as J anuary 6, 2017. The parties jointly requested an
extension of the deadline in order to accommodate the parties engaging in mediation and to accommodate
the agreed upon hearing date. This request was granted and resulted in a new hearing deadline of February
5, 2017. The parties were scheduled to participate in mediation on January 26, 2017. Both the mediation
and the hearing date of J anuary 27, 2017 were postponed at the request of Parent due to medical reasons.
The Hearing Ofﬁcer attempted to try to reach Parent to hold another prehearing conference on February 2,
2017 in order to reschedule the hearing. These efforts were unsuccessful. In order to provide the Parent
with an opportunity to present her case, a new hearing date of February 17, 2017 was set and the deadline
for the extension of the deadline for mailing the ﬁnal extension and order was extended to March 4, 2017.
A Notice of Hearing Date and Memorandum were sent to Parent on February 7, 2017. On February 17,
2017, the hearing was opened. The Attorney for the Board and Ms. Karen Zimmerman, a consultant
employed by the Connecticut Technical High School System were present. Parent did not attend. The
Hearing Ofﬁcer attempted to reach Parent by phone on the record, but was not successful. Calls were also
placed to the A—1 Prince Technical School to determine whether Parent had traveled there in error and it
was determined that the school had no record of Parent arriving. Due to Parent’s failure to appear at the
hearing and present her case, the hearing request was dismissed on the record. However, given the
reported medical reason for Parent’s prior request to postpone the hearing date, and the inability to
ascertain Parent’s current status, the dismissal is without prej udice.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed without prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@PW

Hearing O‘Tﬁcer Signature

ﬂprK’RD

 

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

