December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0109

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. F airﬁeld Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parent

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berehem, Moses & Devlin, P.C.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. F itton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUE:

Is the District obligated to provide Student with an Independent Educational Evaluation (“IEE”)
at public expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On August 25, 2016, the Board received a request for a special education due process hearing
that was ﬁled by Parent. On August 26, 2016, the Connecticut State Department of Education
appointed the undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer to preside over the hearing. The Board ﬁled a
sufﬁciency challenge on August 31, 2016. In response to the sufﬁciency challenge, Parent ﬁled a
second revised request for hearing on August 31, 2016 which contained a stay-put request.

A prehearing conference was held on September 2, 2016, during which September 30, 2016 was
set as a hearing date and the deadline for mailing the ﬁnal decision and order was set as
November 8, 2016. During the preheating conference, Parent’s stay-put request was addressed.
Parent acknowledged that Student had moved out of the town of F airﬁeld in the prior year, and
had been allowed to ﬁnish out her year at Stratﬁeld Elementary School despite living in another
town. Parent moved back to Fairﬁeld after the school year had ended, but into the neighborhood
served by the Holland Hill Elementary School District. The Board and Parents agreed that the
special education and related services set forth in her most recent Individualized Education
Program (“lEP”) were those that were to be implemented without any modiﬁcations. Parent’s
request for the implementation of Student’s most recent Individualized Education Program was
granted. Parent’s request that the District implement the IEP in Student’s prior school, Stratﬁeld
Elementary School, was denied. On September 11, 2016, Parent sent an email to the Hearing
Ofﬁcer indicating she was withdrawing her request for a stay—put order, but still wished to
proceed with the request for an IEE.

On September 16, 2016, the Hearing Ofﬁcer issued a ruling on the sufﬁciency challenge in

 

December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0109

which the request was deemed insufﬁcient, but found that Parents should be permitted to plead
the facts more fully and Parent was given until September 23, 2016 to do so. The Hearing
Ofﬁcer speciﬁcally requested the following information be provided by Parent:

1. A list of the speciﬁc evaluations that Parent claimed were not appropriate.

2. The dates on which those evaluations were conducted.

3. The dates when those evaluations were provided to Parent, if known.

4. The dates when those evaluations were discussed at a Flaming and Placement Team
(“PPT”) meeting, if known.

5. A list containing the date on which Parent informed the District she did not agree with
each evaluation, if any, and a description of how Parent notiﬁed the District of Parents’
disagreement with the evaluation (whether it was in person, by letter or email or at a
meeting).

On September 20, 2016, the Attorney for the Board requested that the ﬁrst hearing date be
postponed because the deadline for ﬁling the amended complaint now fell on the deadline to
exchange exhibits. No objection was made to postponing the hearing date by Parent and this
request was granted. One September 23, 2016, Parent sent an email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer which
containing additional information as her amendment. Parent’s amendment resulted in a revised
mailing deadline of December 7, 2016. On September 25, 2016, Attorney for the Board indicated
she intended to ﬁle a motion to dismiss Parent’s amended complaint. On September 25, 2016,
the Hearing Ofﬁcer set October 3, 2016 as the deadline by which the Board was to ﬁle its motion
to dismiss, and informed Parent that Parent would then have until October 12, 2016 to ﬁle a
written objection and/or an amended hearing request, which would be considered when ruling on
the Board's motion to dismiss. The Board ﬁled a motion to dismiss on October 3, 2016 and on
October 12, 2016, Parent sent an email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer containing facts responsive to the
Board’s motion to dismiss.

LEGAL ANALYSIS:

When ruling on a motion to dismiss a due process hearing request, the hearing ofﬁcer must
consider the allegations of the request in the most favorable light to the pleader. Gold v.
Rowland, 296 Conn. 186, 200, 994 A.2d 106 (2010) Thus, a hearing ofﬁcer is required to take
the facts to be those alleged in the complaint, including those facts necessarily implied from the
allegations, construing them in a manner most favorable to the pleader. 1d. The motion to dismiss
must be decided on the facts as pleaded and must be decided upon that alone. Cogswell v,
American Transit Ins. Co., 282 Conn. 505, 516, 923 A.2d 638 (2007). Thus, the facts alleged by
Parent, and set forth below, are presumed to be true.

Parent’s original request, ﬁled on August 25, 2016, indicated that Student was born on May 18,
2009 and was cun‘ently enrolled in the Fairﬁeld Public School system. Student’s disability was
listed as “Selective Mutism?” The request also contained the following statement under the
heading “Description of the nature of the issues in dispute, including related facts:” on the
Connecticut State Department of Education Bureau of Special Education Due Process Form:
“Request for an Independent Educational Evaluation (IEE) at Public Expense. Previous
evaluations does [sic] not accurately describe my child.”

 

December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0109

An additional document was ﬁled by Parent on August 31, 2016, which contained a revised
description of Student’s disability to state “Selective Mutism? Anxiety?”. The description of
issues in dispute was also revised and now stated; “Request for an Independent Educational
Evaluation (IEE) at Public Expense. Previous evaluations/Repmt Card Information does not
accurately describe my child. In addition, Parent added a statement under the form’s heading
“Proposed resolution of the issues (to the extent known and available at this time)”. Parent now
stated, “I have no problem giving my consent for the “team” at Stratﬁeld Elementary to evaluate
my child because they’ve worked with her for the past two years. I am therefore requesting that
[Student] “stay put” at Stratﬁeld until all evaluations are complete and a decision made.”
Parent’s September 23, 2016 amended hearing request alleged the following facts:

I. The last evaluation of Student was done when Student was at the Early Childhood
Center (“ECC”).
2. Parent’s concerns about Student’s well—being and the accuracy of the evaluation

began at the time Student was in ECC. Parent included a summary of progress
from Student’s time at ECC in which the repoiter, name and position unknown,
indicated Student appeared anxious when demands were placed on her and
Student did not spontaneously use language to make her needs or wants known or
to interact with peers. It was noted in the summaly that Student made no attempts
to seek help. It was also reported that Student made limited progress in the
classroom program. In order to reduce stress on the Student, Student was only
required to respond to demands for verbal responses by her classroom teacher and
Speech and Language Pathologist.

3. Parent had a lengthy meeting with Mr. Michael Rafferty in March of 20l5, and
another meeting with Mr. Michael Cummings, in October of 2015, both
employees of the Fairﬁeld Board of Education, and in these meetings Parent
expressed concerns about Student.

4. Parent had raised concerns about Student with an employee at the State
Depaitment of Education, while Student attended ECC and Stratﬁeld Elementary
School.

5 . Parent stated in the amended request that the Individualized Education Program
done at Stratﬁeld Elementaly School was not an accurate representation of
Student.

6. Parent had pointed out to the school based members of the PPT that Student
behaves differently outside of the school environment and had communicated to
team members at the Stratﬁeld Elementary School by sending audio clips of
Student reading as well as doing an audio recording of Student for a class
presentation.

In Parent’s October 12, 2016 response to the Board’s motion to dismiss, Parent alleged the
following additional facts in response to the Board’s motion:

7. Student has always been shy, reseiyed and observant.

8. Student began ECC as a child who would only use her words with the speech
pathologist and a few kids in a low tone. In the classroom setting her tone was
inaudible. This continued for a while until the suggestion was made that the
school psychologist work with Student to improve her volume and ability to use

 

December 2, 2016 F inal Decision and Order 17-0109

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

her voice in all settings at school. However, punishment (not positive
reinforcement) was used in the classroom setting as a method to get her to use her
voice. For example, Student was instructed to use her voice to get help opening a
container or get permission to use the bathroom. She would either have an
accident in school or hold in her urine until she comes home. This behavior
continued in the beginning at Stratﬁeld Elementary until members Student’s
school based team and Parent told her that it was okay to communicate her desires
in any way she felt comfortable at school.

Student attended ECC from May 2012 to July 2014. During this time Parent had a
hard time convincing the school based members of the PPT at ECC that Student’s
behavior was different outside the school environment. Despite Parent’s efforts to
show Videos of Student playing at the park, playing games with her sister,
laughing, talking and reading books, the response from the PPT was that Student
has to display those behaviors at school. The only interest shown by the school
based members of the PPT during Student’s enrollment at ECC was to evaluate
Student. Although the District requested consent to conduct further evaluations of
Student and Mother initially agreed to consent to additional evaluations, F ather
objected and no additional evaluations were conducted at ECC, because both
Parents subsequently objected to the conducting of any evaluations, because it
was obvious that ECC would only consider their information.

Parent felt that she had a slightly better response from the Stratﬁeld Elementary
School staff because she was able to relate to the resource teacher and the speech
pathologist who had both worked with Student’s older sibling in the past. Parent
used this communication with these staff members to her advantage to show
Student’s learning capabilities, her strengths and weaknesses as well as share
ideas.

At the ﬁrst PPT conducted at Stratﬁeld Elementary School, Parent received
information from an occupational therapist about her concerns about Student’s
visual and spatial abilities. Parent mentioned at the meeting that Student is left
handed by nature and began using her right hand after ECC staff used Factor
Analysis to detemiine “something else”. Parent expressed concern about the ﬂow
of sensory and motor information and how Student’s brain processes information.
Parent stated that after this PPT, the District did not mention any suspected areas
of disabilities to Parents, only the need for an evaluation.

The schools would communicate with Student’s pediatrician and based on various
things the Pediatrician would ask Student to do or questions he would ask, Parent
was able to determine what the school and pediatrician were thinking and that
selective mutisrn was not a factor/concern.

The pediatrician advised Parent to speak with PPT about her concerns, to which
Parent’s response was that Student’s behaviors and capabilities outside the school
environment are not as important as her behaviors and capabilities in School.

In August 2016, the Pediatrician inquired as to whether there was a family history
of thyroid problems to which Parent responded “not that I am aware of” and
Parents were given a questionnaire with questions about Student’s social,
emotional and physical capabilities. Parents did not answer this questionnaire.
The types of questions in the questionnaire focused on Students skeletal, muscular

 

December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17—0109

and central nervous system development.

16. Parent had a meeting with Mr. Michael Rafferty in March 2015 in which she
shared concerns about punishment of student and showed videos of Student’s
reading. During this meeting Parent expressed the need to get someone else who
is able to work with her outside the school environment and take Parent concerns
and information as well as the school’s in order to give Parents and school the
answers they needed. Mr. Rafferty indicated he would speak with Parent again but
never did.

17. In October 2015, Parent requested a meeting with Mr. Rafferty, and was informed
that he no longer worked for Fairﬁeld Public Schools. Parent then had a meeting
with Mr. Michael Cummings where she reported an incident where an adult had
stiuck Student. In this meeting, Mr. Cummings asked what Parent was trying to
accomplish because he was told she would come to his ofﬁce with papers with
information or convey information that had no merit. Prior to the meeting with
MI. Cummings, Parents and Mr. Cummings had meetings with the school
psychologist and principal.

18. At a PPT meeting at Stratﬁeld Elementary, Parent thanked the school based
members of the PPT for giving Student the opportunity to use her voice via an
audio recording all the Parents sent in. Parent thought that was a good idea
because all the other kids recited their lines on stage and at the end the audio
recording was used with all Students saying their lines.

19. At the same PPT meeting, Parent then informed the PPT that Parent’s sister, a
speech pathologist had told Parent that Student used the right amount of words
and syllables in the appropriate time frame for a child her age. The school speech
pathologist agreed with this statement. Parent then requested her sister assess
Student. District staff informed Parent that the Fairﬁeld School District has to
follow celtain guidelines regarding information from outside sources.

20. At the last PPT at Holland Hill, which occu1Ted after the hearing request was
ﬁled, the District informed Parent of need for an evaluation with little emphasis
on getting more information about Student’s social, emotional or learning
capabilities outside the school environment.

“A motion to dismiss tests, inter alia, whether, on the face of the record, the court is without
jurisdiction.” Walshon v. Ballon Stall Bader and Nadler, RC, 121 Conn. App. 366 (2010). Such
motions are speciﬁcally authorized under the R.C.S.A. § 10-76-h-8(f)(2). Pursuant to R.C.S.A.
Section § 10-76h-8 (a) and (0(2), the Board has moved to dismiss Parents’ request in its entirety.

In its motion to dismiss, the Board argues Parent’s request must be dismissed because the claims
are time-barred under the applicable state and federal statutes of limitation and the request for an
lEE is moot, thereby depriving the Hearing Ofﬁcer of jurisdiction. Each of these arguments will
be addressed in turn, after legal analysis of Parent’s sole requested relief.

Independent Education Evaluations. The only relief sought by Parent is an IEE at public expense.
Parent has not claimed that the services and education speciﬁed in Student’s IEP are
inappropriate, but rather claims they don’t adequately describe Student. For this reason, Parent
believes an IEE is necessary to gain an understanding of the Student, particularly with regards to

 

December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17—0109

understanding the disparity between Student’s functioning in the school and home environments.

The right to obtain an IEE is a procedural safeguard afforded special education students under
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (“IDEA”). 20 U.S.C. § 1415b. Since Parent has
not made any claims of any substantive Violations, to gain the requested relief of an IEE, Parent’s
claims must be grounded in a claimed violation of Student’s procedural safeguards. Procedural
Violations alone do not allow a Parent to prevail at a due process hearing. (See Bal OfEduc. V.
Rowley, 458 US. 176, 206—07, 102 S. Ct 3034, 3051, 73 L. Ed. 2d. 690 (1982), setting feith a 2-
part inquiry of compliance with procedural requirements and Whether or not the IEP is
appropriate). Where only a procedural violation has been alleged, it thus must be determined if
the procedural violation has occurred, and if so, did the Violation operate in a manner to deny the
Student a FAPE. Id.

Procedurally, a Parent may request an IEE after disagreeing with one that has been conducted by
the District. “A parent has the right to an independent educational evaluation at public expense if
the parent disagrees with an evaluation obtained by the public agency, subject to the conditions
in paragraphs (b)(2) through (4) of this section”. 34 CPR. § 300.502(b)(1) Thus, the District
must have conducted an evaluation, and the Parent obj ected, before a Parent’s right to request an
IEE at public expense is triggered. In this way, the regulations operate to deny the requested
relief of an IEE to a Parent who has refused to allow the District to conduct any of its own
evaluations and is seeking to limit the District to considering only outside evaluations chosen by
Parent,

As discussed in greater detail below, even when the facts alleged in the complaint are assumed to
be true, and viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, they are insufﬁcient to support a
ﬁnding that there were any evaluations within the statutOIy period with which Parent disagreed,
or that Parent informed the District that she disagreed with the evaluation that was conducted at
the ECC and requested an IEE because of that disagreement. Even assuming arguendo that
Parent’s request (made at a PPT meeting held within the statutory period) that her sister, a speech
and language pathologist, conduct an evaluation of Student was actually a request for an IEE,
this request was not made in response to the reporting of any evaluation that had been conducted
by the Board. Rather Parent describes the request being made in the context of a discussion in
which the school’s speech and language pathologist agreed with Parent’s report of her sister’s
informal assessment of Student’s language. Since that PPT occurred within the statutory period
and no evaluations had taken place, the request could not have been made on the basis that the
speech and language pathologist’s evaluation was not appropriate.

Application of the Statute of Limitations. The Board ﬁrst claims that that the hearing ofﬁcer
lacks jurisdiction to hear Parent’s request, because any claims of inadequacies or errors in the
Board’s evaluation 01' evaluations involve evaluations conducted more than two years before the
request was ﬁled, and as such, the claims are time-barred.

 

State and federal law provides for a two-year statute of limitations for bringing claims in a
special education due process hearing. In Connecticut, 3 parent has two years in which to request
a hearing from the time the Board proposed or refused to initiate or change the identiﬁcation,
evaluation or educational placement or the provision of a free appropriate public education to a

 

December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0109

Student. Conn. Gen. Stat. § 10—76h(a)(4). Under the IDEA, parents have 2 years to request a
hearing from the date the parent knew or should have known about the alleged action that forms
the basis of the complaint, or if the State has an explicit statute of limitations for ﬁling such
claims the duration of time that state allows. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(f)(3)(C)

Assuming all facts alleged by Parent to be true, Parent has not alleged any facts which can
Support a ﬁnding or inference that any evaluation 01‘ reevaluation of Student has been conducted
and/or repoxted at a PPT meeting within the statutoiy period. Contained within Parents various
submissions is a single reference to an evaluation which occurred during Student’s attendance at
ECC. Student attended ECC from May 2012 to July 2014, thus the facts alleged by Parent can
only support a ﬁnding that any evaluation with which Parent may have disagreed occun‘ed
outside the statutory period.

There are two exceptions to the statute of limitations under the IDEA‘ A parent may defeat the
statute of limitations and have a claim about actions occurring more than two years before the
ﬁling of the complaint, if they can show that the Parent was prevented from requesting a hearing
because they didn’t receive a copy of the procedural safeguards or that the District
misrepresented that they had resolved the basis for the hearing request thereby preventing the
Parents from requesting a due process hearing. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(D(3)(C)(i) and (ii)

No facts have been alleged which would support a ﬁnding 01' inference that any of the recognized
exceptions to application of the statute of limitations are applicable in this case. Parent has not
alleged that she was prevented from requesting a due process hearing by misrepresentations by
the District that it had resolved the basis for the hearing request, nor has it been alleged that the
District failed to provide Parent with a notice of their Procedural Safeguards.

As such, the Hearing Ofﬁcer lacks jurisdiction over Parent’s claims that the evaluation
conducted of Student while at ECC was deﬁcient in form or content, because such claims are
barred by both the state and federal statutes of limitations.

Mootness Claim. The Board’s second argument in favor of dismissal is that the Hearing Ofﬁcer
lacks jurisdiction because the evaluation with which the Parent disagrees is no longer current, the
Student is due to be re—evaluated as required under the IDEA, and Parent has not consented to
reevaluation, and as a result Parent’s claim is moot. While not binding, the Hearing Ofﬁcer ﬁnds
the reasoning of the 11th Circuit Case cited by the Board persuasive, especially in light of the
facts in that case which closely track those alleged in Parent’s request. TRV. Bryan Cnty, Sch.
Disin, 792 F.3d 1284 (11th Cir. 2015)

In T,P v. Bryan Cnly. Sch. Dist, the Circuit Court held that where the Student had not had an
evaluation in over two years and was due for a revaluation, pursuant to 20 U.S.C. §1414(a), an
IEE would not redress any claimed procedural injury because the evaluation being challenged
was no longer current. Id. An IEE is not meant to be Viewed in isolation. It is another source of
information to be reviewed at a PPT meeting, along with the other current reports and
evaluations conducted by the District, so that the PPT has sufﬁcient information to develop a
program that is reasonably calculated to provide Student with a FAPE. In the present case, Parent
states that the Student has not been evaluated in over two years and that she has not provided

 

December 2, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17—0109

consent for any evaluations in that time. To ask for an IEE over two years after the last time you
permitted the District to evaluate Student is like asking for a grape, and saying you need it so you
can compare it to a raisin. The ECC evaluation, conducted when the child was in preschool, is no
longer cuITent and an IEE conducted now would not redress any procedural injuries that could be
claimed, even if the claim was not already barred by the statute of limitations, because Parent’s
claim is moot.

Parent continues to have the right to obtain her own evaluation of Student at her own expense
and such evaluation must be considered the PPT, if it meets agency criteria, with respect to the
provision ofa FAPE to Student 34 CFR § 300.502(c)(l)

Parent could have obtained fmther evaluations of the Student by the District any time that they
were offered during the past two years by providing consent. Parent states unequivocally that she
chose not to do this. There is nothing ban'ing Parent from providing consent now. If Parent
consents to the evaluations or reevaluations presently proposed by the District, and upon review
of the evaluation 01' reevaluation ﬁnds them to be inappropriate, she may immediately indicate
her disagreement, and ask for an IEE, which would then trigger the Board’s obligation to ﬁle for
due process 01' provide an IEE at public expense.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the Board’s Motion to Dismiss is granted and the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action 011 the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educatidn shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the-hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals fiom the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01 iede1a1
cou1t by eithe1 party in accoidance with the provisions of Section 4—183,C01111ecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

iﬂ/W/ﬁim

Vﬁearing Ofﬁce1 Signatme

Bfai'té Hv Fitwq

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagcdoc (110 disk)
4/1/04

 

