February 10, 2017 Final Decision and Order 17—0233

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student V. Guilford Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Attorney Christine H. Barrington
ACCESS! Education Consulting
94 Park Terrace Ave.
West Haven CT 06516

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Alyce Alfano
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 0690 1 -3 522

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Did the District fail to provide the Student With an appropriate reading program, and thus
a free appropriate public education, during the 2016-17 school year?

2. If so, does the Eagle Hill Southport School provide the Student with an appropriate
program?

3. Are Parents entitled to reimbursement for out of pocket expenses incurred for
supplemental literacy instruction by the Learning House provided to the Student from
September 7, 2016 through October 26, 2016?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On November 29, 2016, the Board received a special education due process hearing request ﬁled
by Student’s Guardians and the Connecticut State Department of Education appointed the
undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer to preside over the matter. On December 7, 2016, Attorney
Barrington ﬁled her appearance on behalf of the Guardians. During the prehearing conference
he1d on December 9, 2016, J anuary 30, 2017 was set as the hearing date and the deadline for the
mailing of the ﬁnal decision and order was established as February 10, 2016. Attorney for the
Board tendered exhibits to the Hearing Ofﬁcer 5 days before the hearing. Attorney for the
Guardians did not.

Upon arriving for the hearing the Hearing Ofﬁcer inquired of the Attorney for the Guardians as
to Whether she had prepared exhibits for the Hearing Ofﬁcer. The Attorney for the Guardians
responded she had not. The hearing was then opened on J anuary 30, 2017 and Counsel indicated
on the record that the parties had entered into and executed a settlement agreement resolving the
issues before the Hearing Ofﬁcer. The parties also indicated that a dispute had arisen subsequent

 

February l0, 2017 Final Decision and Order 17-0233

to the execution of the agreement and prior to the opening of the hearing. At this point Attomey
for the Guardians tendered to the Hearing Ofﬁcer a Motion for Withdrawal of Complaintant’s
[sic] Request for an Impartial Due Process Hearing without Prejudice (hereinafter “Motion”).
The Attorney for the Board obj ected on the record to the Guardians’ Motion and moved for a
dismissal with prejudice or an order that the hearing commence.

In support of her Motion, the Attorney for the Guardians argued that to not dismiss the
Guardian’s hearing request without prej udice would be unfair and unjust because it would
presumptively, prohibitively, 0r punitively deny the Guardians due process “...should a dispute
over his special education programming arise.” While the use of the word “arise” in the motion
might suggest concern about disputes involving future actions by the Board, it must be inferred
from the relief sought, that the Guardians were seeking a dismissal without prejudice so that they
would retain the right to relitigate, through another due process hearing, the very issues the
parties had just agreed to resolve Via a settlement agreement in lieu ofproceeding to the hearing.

Attorney for the Guardians also stated in her Motion that the Hearing Ofﬁcer lacked the
authority to interpret or enforce a settlement agreement and cited case law supporting this
assertion. Such case law was irrelevant to consideration of the Guardian’s Motion, because
neither party had tendered a written agreement for the Hearing Ofﬁcer to enforce or interpret.

The Attorney for the Guardians went on to state in her Motion that while lacking the authority to
interpret or enforce agreements, the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s authority is to at all times ensure the rights
of the children with disabilities and their Guardians are protected. These protections were
afforded Student When the Hearing Ofﬁcer opened a due process hearing for the express exercise
of Student’s right to an administrative hearing and decision on the merits. The due process
hearing had been opened that day in order to provide the parties With the opportunity to present
testamentary and documentary evidence on the three issues set f01th above, so that such evidence
could be considered by the Hearing Ofﬁcer when she rendered a ﬁnal decision and order. At no
time after the hearing was opened, did the Guardians request to go forward with the due process
hearing, despite being offered that opportunity. Instead, Guardians afﬁrmatively chose to
withdraw their request rather than have the hearing. The parties were sworn in and canvassed by
the Hearing Ofﬁcer and each testiﬁed that the three aforementioned issues were entirely resolved
by the settlement agreement which they had executed.

Having found that the paities had settled all three issues before the hearing ofﬁcer and that
Guardians wished to rely on the resolution negotiated in their settlement agreement rather than
have the matter heard, the Guardian’s Motion was denied and the matter was dismissed on the
record with prej udice. As noted on the record the Hearing Ofﬁcer’s ruling on the Guardian’s
Motion does not prohibit the Guardians from ﬁling a request for a special education due process
hearing on ANY issue other than the three cited listed in this decision. 34 CFR § 300.513 (0)

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for .
providing special education for the student requiriﬂg special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after '
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educatidn shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the‘hearing ofﬁcer;

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
c0u1t by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(1)(2)(A).

ﬂé/ /

’Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

B/Cl' {(51% (1:7L{’O ﬂ

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name 1n Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

