December 23, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0236

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student v. East Haven Board of Education
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Rebecca R. Santiago
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103

Appearing before: J ustino Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Was the program offered by the Board for the 2016-2017 school year appropriate and did
it provide the Student With a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least
restrictive environment (LRE)?

2. Should the Student’s program contain modiﬁcations of school work in order to receive
FAPE in the LRE?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed as Other Health Impaired ADD/ADHD and is entitled to receive
FAPE as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20
U.S.C. §1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq. At a planning and
placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents rejected the program offered by the Board for the
2016-2017 school year and requested modiﬁcations to the program. The Board refused the
Parents’ request.

On November 30, 2016, the Board received notice of the Parents’ request for due process. An
impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on November 30, 2016 and a pre-hearing conference was
held on December 8, 2016. The parties agreed to go to mediation in place of a resolution
meeting. In an electronic transmission, the Parents advised the hearing ofﬁcer that they were
withdrawing the matter. There was no objection by the Board. The withdrawal was granted. The
date for the mailing of the Final Decision and Order is February 13, 2017.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board bf Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
com“: by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

h, , \ /
K. I‘ﬂ
Hearingbgiéasi‘gnggge/'

\_/

Justine Rosado ‘
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

