August 31, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0011

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Wethersﬁe1d Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Student: Parents

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Peter Maher
Shipman & Goodwin, LLP
One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: Attorney Brette H. Fitton
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUE:

Was the evaluation conducted by the District appropriate, thereby relieving the District of the
obligation to fund the Independent Educational Evaluation, speciﬁcally the neuropsychological
evaluation, requested by Parents?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND SUMMARY:

On I u1y 8, 2016, Parents received a request for a special education due process hearing ﬁled by
the Wethersﬁeld Board of Education. On July 11, 2016, the Connecticut State Department of
Education appointed the undersigned Hearing Ofﬁcer to preside over the hearing. During the
preheating conference held on July 15, 2016, the deadline for mailing the ﬁnal decision and
order was established as August 22, 2016. At the preheating conference, the parties jointly
requested an extension of the mailing deadline in order to a110w the parties to engage in
settlement negotiations and this joint request was memorialized in an email sent by Attorney for
the Board on July 15, 2016. The request for an extension was granted and resulted in a new
mailing deadline of September 21, 2016. While a tentative hearing date of September 8, 2016
was proposed by the Hearing Ofﬁcer at the prehearing conference, the scheduling of this hearing
date was subject to conﬁrmation of the Board’s availability. The Attorney for the Board 1ater
informed the Hearing Ofﬁcer that his client was not available on that date. Other potential
hearing dates were discussed through an exchange of email correspondence and September 22,
2016 was identiﬁed as the first hearing date for the matter. On August 22, 2016, Attorney for the
Board sent an email to the Hearing Ofﬁcer in which he indicated that the matter had settled and
that the Board was withdrawing its request for a special education hearing.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

In light of the above facts, the case is dismissed.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiriﬂg special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Educatidn shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the-hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
court by either palty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

“Hearing Ofﬁcer Sig‘namre

Brat 1L6 H. PH? iq

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagcdoc (ho disk)
4/ 1/04

 

