February 7, 2017 Final Decision and Order 17-0190

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Trumbull Board of Education V. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parent: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
[Corrected F ebruary 24, 2107]
ISSUES:

1. Was the educational, functional and behavioral assessments performed by the Board appropriate?
If not;

2. Is the Student entitled to an Independent educational, functional and behavioral assessment at
public expense?

SUMMARY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student is classiﬁed with Autism and is entitled to receive a free and appropriate public education
(FAPE) as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C.
§1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents disagreed with the Board’s assessments
and requested functional and behavioral assessments. The Board denied the request and ﬁled for due
process. An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on November 7, 2016 and a pre-hearing conference
was held on November 15 , 2016. In an electronic transmission, the parties informed the hearing ofﬁcer
that the matter had been resolved but requested additional time to ﬁnalize the agreement.

In an electronic transmission The Board’s attorney informed the hearing ofﬁcer that the agreement had
been signed and the Parents had withdrawn with prej udice their request for additional assessments. The
Board withdrew their request for due process with prejudice. The mailing date was extended to
February 17, 2017 to accommodate the ﬁnalization of the agreement.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
comt by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

Hearing Cfﬁcfer 1g

xx/

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

