September 21, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0086

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Student and East Hartford Board of Education

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Mother, Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Linda Yoder
Shipman & Goodwin LLP

One Constitution Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-1919

Appearing before: ' Attorney Ann F . Bird, Hearing Ofﬁcer
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Was the Student’s program at the time of the disciplinary offense appropriate?

2. Was the Student’s behavior a manifestation of his disability?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student requested an expedited special education due process hearing in the above—captioned matter
on August 11, 2016. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on August 11, 2016.
A telephonic pre-hearing conference was convened on August 25, 2016. The Student’s mother appeared
on behalf of the Student and Attorney Linda Yoder appeared on beha1f of the Board of Education. It was
established that the deadline to issue the ﬁnal decision and order is October 25, 2016. An evidentiary
hearing was scheduled for September 20, 2016.

The evidentiary hearing was convened on September 20, 2016. Attorney Linda Yoder appeared on behalf
of the East Haltford Board of Education, as did Director of Pupil Personnel Dr. Sharon Bremner. The
Student did not appear at the hearing nor did the Student communicate with the Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer
to indicate that she was unable to attend the hearing.

Attorney Yoder reported on behalf of the East Hartford Board of Education that the Student’s mother
recently withdrew the Student from enrollment with the Board of Education, indicating that she would
home school the Student. Attorney Yoder and the Board attempted to communicate with the Student’s
mother about this choice and to ﬁnd out whether she desired to proceed with this matter. In addition, the
Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer sent the Student’s mother an e-mail explaining that she could request dismissal
if she did not wish to proceed with the case. The Student’s mother did not respond to any of these
inquiries. The Notice of Hearing and the Request for Due Process were marked as Hearing Ofﬁcer
Exhibits 1 and 2 and the Student’s Individualized Education Program of May 25, 2016 was marked as
Board Exhibit 1 at the hearing. The Student failed to appear at the scheduled hearing or take other
reasonable steps to prosecute this matter.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that this matter is dismissed for failure to prosecute.

 

If the local or regional board of education 01‘ the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing Ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01' federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

ﬁfé/

Hearing Ofﬁ/er Signature

4w. FEIKD

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04 '

 

