November 1, 2016 Final Decision and Order 17-0057

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Trumbull Board of Education and Student

Appearing on behalf of the Board of Education: Attorney Marsha Moses
Berchem, Moses & Devlin PC
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing on behalf of the Student: Mother, Pro Se
Father, Pro Se
Appearing before: Attorney Ann F. Bird, Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER
ISSUES:

1. Are the Board of Education’s evaluations of the Student appropriate?
2. If not, is the Student entitled to an independent educational evaluation at public expense?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Board requested a special education due process hearing in the above-captioned matter on August
10, 2016. This Impartial Hearing Ofﬁcer was appointed to hear the case on August 2, 2016. A
telephonic pre—hearing conference was convened on August 10, 2016. The Student’s Mother and F athei'
appeared on behalf of the Student and Attorney Marsha Moses appeared on behalf of the Board of
Education. At the conference it was established that the deadline for ﬁling the ﬁnal decision is
September 9, 2016, and an evidentiary hearing was scheduled for October 6, 2016. Subsequently, the
evidentiary hearing was cancelled due to a party’s unforeseen schedule conﬂict.

On September 6, 2016, Counsel for the Board of Education submitted a written request for a thirty-day
postponement and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in this
case to October 7, 2016. The Student agreed to the requested postponement and it was granted. On
October 5, 2016, Counsel for the Board of Education submitted a written request for a thirty-day
postponement and extension of the timelines to conduct the hearing and to ﬁle the ﬁnal decision in this
case to November 4, 2016. The Student did not object to the request and it was granted.

A conference was convened on October 25, 2016 to reschedule the evidentiary hearing. At that time, the
Student’s F ather withdrew the Student’s request for an independent educational evaluation, resenting
only his right to disagree with any evaluation that the Board of Education may perform in the future.
The Student’s Mother did not support the Father’s request for an independent educational evaluation. In
response to the Father’s withdrawal of his request, the Board of Education requested that this matter be
dismissed.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

It is ordered that the Board of Education’s request is granted and the matter is dismissed with prejudice.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state 01‘ federal
court by either party in accordance with the provisions of Section 4—183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

@Fw

Hearing Ofﬁcer Signature

flwa 5th

 

Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpage.doc (ho disk)
4/1/04 ‘

 

