January 3, 2017 F ina1 Decision and Order 17—0229

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Fairﬁeld Board of Education v. Student
Appearing on behalf of the Parents: Pro Se

Appearing on behalf of the Board: Attorney Michelle Laubin
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, RC.
75 Broad Street
Milford, CT 06460

Appearing before: Justine Rosado, Esq.
Hearing Ofﬁcer

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER

ISSUES:

1. Were the Triennial Evaluations performed by the Board in December 2015 appropriate?
If not;
2. Is the Student entitled to an independent educational evaluation at public expense7?

SUMMARY and PROCEDURAL HISTORY:

The Student has been identiﬁed with Speciﬁc Learning Disability and is entitled to receive FAPE
as deﬁned in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA) 20 U.S.C.
§1401 et seq. and Connecticut General Statute §10-76a et seq.

At a planning and placement team (PPT) meeting, the Parents disagreed with the Triennial
Evaluation performed by the Board and requested an Independent Educational Evaluation and a
neurological evaluation at public expense. The Board refused the Parents’ request and the Board
ﬁled for due process. The parties agreed to a resolution meeting. The date was pending.

An impartial hearing ofﬁcer was appointed on November 28, 2016 and a pre—hearing conference
was held on December 13, 2016. At the pre-hearing conference the Board informed the hearing
ofﬁcer that they were withdrawing their request for due process because the Parents had
withdrawn their request for independent evaluations. In an electronic transmission, the Parents
advised the hearing ofﬁcer that they were withdrawing their request for independent evaluations.
The date for mailing the Final Decision and Order is J anuary 6, 2017.

FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:

THE MATTER IS DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

 

If the local or regional board of education or the uniﬁed school district responsible for
providing special education for the student requiring special education does not take
action on the ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer Within ﬁfteen days after
receipt thereof, the State Board of Education shall take appropriate action to enforce the
ﬁndings or prescription of the hearing ofﬁcer.

Appeals from the hearing decision of the hearing ofﬁcer may be made to state or federal
court by either party in accordance With the provisions of Section 4-183, Connecticut
General Statutes, and Title 20, United States Code 1415(i)(2)(A).

 

 

\ pg;
HearingxiﬁﬁceTngnaturre/ '

  

Justine Rosado
Hearing Ofﬁcer Name in Print

signpagedoc (ho disk)
4/1/04

 

