October 18, 1999 -2- Final Decision and Order 99-186     SUMMARY:  The issue in this matter was whether the wheelchair bound student should be allowed to attend the public school without using a tray or other device on her wheelchair that the Board believed to be necessary for her safety.  After the first day of hearing the Hearing Officer recommended that to save the time and money involved in a hearing, the parties might want to consider meeting together with the student&#8482;s physician, who is a pediatric orthopedic specialist, to gain his opinion on the issue of safety and his knowledge about the child&#8482;s current level of functioning with the wheelchair.  The parties reached an agreement on the third day of hearing and mutually requested that the hearing officer enter their agreement as a Final Decision and Order.  In accord with that agreement, the following order is issued.   FINAL DECISION AND ORDER:  1. The student will start school at Maple Hill School on Tuesday, October 12, 1999.  The student will use her wheelchair in accordance with the recommendations of Dr. Thomas S. Renshaw, M.D., as stated in his letter of September 22, 1999.  See attachment A.  2. Between October 4, 1999 and October 12, 1999 a [PPT] will be convened to discuss various issues relating to the student&#8482;s starting school, including but not limited to the level of aide supervision in the classroom, corridors, cafeteria, resource room, use of chair (including speed and horn) and health care issues.  3. Training staff in facilitating and monitoring the student&#8482;s use of the chair will take place the week of October 4, 1999 according to a schedule established with Mrs. Sciacca, the principal of the school.  The mother of the student can participate in all training.  4. The parents will abide by school policy in relationship to school visits.  5. The student will begin school each day with her class.  The goal is to have the student dropped off and met by school personnel.     